Title: 10759_Human_assisted_Robotic_P.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=dlQ1iUpQNf

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Human-assisted Robotic Policy Refinement via Action Preference Optimization 

Wenke Xia 1,3,4, ∗

, Yichu Yang 2, Hongtao Wu 2, Xiao Ma 2, Tao Kong 2, Di Hu 1,3,4, † 

> 1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing  

> 2

ByteDance Seed  

> 3

Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE  

> 4

Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance 

## Abstract 

Establishing a reliable and iteratively refined robotic system is essential for de-ploying real-world applications. While Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models are widely recognized as the foundation model for such robotic deployment, their reliance on offline expert demonstrations critically limits their capacity for post-deployment refinement . To mitigate this limitation, we introduce Action Preference Optimization (APO) , a method designed to refine VLA models by human-assisted preference alignment gathered through interaction with environments. This method begins with a human-robot collaboration framework for reliable failure correction and interaction trajectory collection through human intervention. However, directly leveraging these interaction trajectories for preference optimization is non-trivial due to the challenges of irreversible robotic actions and token distribution mis-match. To solve this, APO proposes an adaptive reweighting algorithm with binary desirability signals derived from interaction, empowering VLA models effectively suppress failure-prone actions while enhancing corrective action adaptation. Ulti-mately, APO equips VLA models with the crucial capability to learn from failure, paving the way for their iterative refinement and reliable deployment in dynamic environments. The experiments conducted in simulation and real-world scenarios prove superior generalization and robustness of our human-assisted framework across a variety of manipulation tasks. We believe this work could bring insights for efficient and stable optimization of VLA models through human-robot collabo-ration. The code and dataset are released at https://github.com/GeWu-Lab/Action-Preference-Optimization. 

## 1 Introduction 

Fostering continuous improvement is crucial for the development of robust robotic manipulation systems in real-world scenarios [ 10 , 28 , 44 ]. Benefiting from the capacity for generalizable reasoning and scalable learning, Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models [ 3, 4 , 8 , 18 , 43 , 21 , 47 ] have been widely recognized as the foundation model for such robotic deployment systems. However, prevailing training paradigm for these models hinges on large-scale, offline datasets of expert demonstrations. This severely limits their post-deployment refinement , as they lack the intrinsic ability to continually learn from failures or adapt to novel scenarios encountered in the real world. To enhance the continuous learning ability of robotic systems, interactive imitation learning frame-works [ 7, 17 ] have been developed to refine error-prone trajectories via iterative human-in-the-loop 

> ∗

Work is done during internship at ByteDance Seed 

> †

Corresponding author 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). Policy Execution Human Intervention                

> Takeover
> Automatic Execution Failure Action Human Intervention
> Collect
> Interaction Traj.
> Adaptive Reweighting
> (b) Action Preference Optimization
> Failure Occurs
> ·
> ·
> ·
> ·
> ·
> ·
> ·
> ·
> Balanced
> Sample
> VLA Model
> Maximize
> Utility
> Deploy
> (a) Human -robot Collaboration Deployment

Figure 1: Our method consists of two key components: (a) the human-robot collaboration deployment framework for reliable deployment and interaction trajectory collection with human intervention. (b) the action preference optimization process with adaptive reweighting for VLA models learning from sub-optimal interaction trajectories. The size of each circle represents its weight during training. correction feedback. Among them, behavior cloning [ 15 , 23 , 35 ] has been widely utilized to fine-tune a base policy model with manually corrected intervention data in a supervised learning fashion. In contrast, recent methods [ 20 , 26 ] seek to propose effective off-policy reinforcement learning algorithms from sub-optimal human intervention trajectories. However, behavior cloning fails to fully exploit failure trajectories, which are valuable signals for learning robust policies. At the same time, reinforcement learning methods encounter significant scalability limitations in training large-scale VLA models, due to the inherent instability and challenge of developing generalizable value functions. To date, the effective adaptation of VLA models for downstream manipulation tasks remains understudied, particularly within sub-optimal human intervention paradigms. To bridge this gap, we propose Action Preference Optimization (APO) , a new paradigm moves beyond the limitations of both behavior cloning and reinforcement learning. By learning from action-level preferences captured during interactions, our approach fully exploits the valuable information in failure trajectories while maintaining the optimization stability required for large-scale VLA models. Our method is founded on a human-robot collaboration framework designed to ensure reliable deployment while simultaneously generating data for policy refinement, as illustrated in Figure 1(a). When the robot encounters challenging situations, real-time human interventions not only guarantee successful task completion but also provide corrective trajectories. These trajectories are collected as preference pairs to refine the policy. Furthermore, to address the imbalanced distribution of action types in the collected data, we employ a balanced sampling method. This ensures a proportional representation of all interaction data for the subsequent VLA preference optimization However, directly applying this preference data to fine-tune autoregressive VLA models presents two significant challenges: (1) Irreversible interaction: While LLMs often require paired preference data, the irreversible nature of physical interaction makes it difficult to gather perfect positive-negative action samples under identical conditions. (2) Token probability mismatch: Autoregressive VLA models discretize continuous actions into tokens, causing a mismatch between token probabilities and the true action loss, which complicates preference alignment. To address these problems, we first employ Kahneman & Tversky’s prospect theory [ 11 , 40 ] to formulate a preference alignment objective that learns from binary desirability signals derived from interaction. This objective relaxes the demands of preference pairs, making it suitable for learning from irreversible robotic interaction trajectories. Furthermore, we propose an adaptive reweighting method that leverages decoded continuous actions to guide preference optimization in the discrete action token space. This approach addresses the challenge of action token probability mismatch via the dynamic modulation of sample-wise training weighting, thereby concentrating gradient optimization on failure-prone interaction actions. Through weight refinement, we apply preference alignment optimization to VLA models, enhancing performance when learning from sub-optimal manipulation correction trajectories .To systematically evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed system, we conduct a comprehensive set of experiments in RoboMimic [ 29 ] simulation environments. The empirical results demonstrate that APO facilitates rapid adaptation in in-distribution scenarios while maintaining robust performance across a variety of unseen perturbations. Furthermore, lifelong learning experiments demonstrate the framework’s capacity for iterative improvement through human intervention. To evaluate the practical viability of the proposed framework, we conducted real-world experiments on fine-grained insertion tasks under a range of disruption conditions, demonstrating its robustness and applicability in real-world robotic manipulation scenarios. 22 Related Works 

2.1 Vision-Language-Action Models 

Achieving generalizable robotic manipulation remains a significant challenge within the field of robotics. Motivated by recent advances in foundation models [ 19 , 39 , 42 , 32 , 45 , 48 ], some works [ 6 , 12 , 41 ] attempt to construct large-scale real-world robotic datasets to facilitate devel-opment of generalizable Vision-Language Action (VLA) models. Building upon these datasets, recent research [ 5 , 18 , 33 ] formulates robotic action prediction as a next token prediction problem within the framework of VLMs. In contrast, alternative studies [ 24 , 38 ] investigate the applicability of diffusion-based methods to model multi-modal action distributions, thereby facilitating robustness in manipulation tasks. While these works focus on behavior cloning from expert demonstrations, Grape [ 49 ] proposes a trajectory-level preference alignment method to boost generalizability by incorporating both successful and failed trials. However, the requirements of paired trajectories under the same conditions make it infeasible in real-world scenarios. In this work, we propose the action preference optimization method to continuously refine VLA models by integrating human-in-the-loop intervention preference data. 

2.2 Preference Alignment of Large Language Models 

Contemporary methods [ 9, 30 , 31 , 50 ] implement Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) through a two-stage method, which first trains a reward estimation model and optimizes LLMs to maximize the given estimated reward with a reinforcement learning method [ 13 , 36 , 25 ]. However, this paradigm is slow and unstable in practice. DPO [ 34 ] proposes a single-step alternative that reparameterizes the RLHF objective into a closed-form loss function to directly maximize the log-likelihood margin between preferred and dispreferred outputs. Extending this framework, KTO [ 11 ] introduces the human-aware losses for learning from a binary signal of whether an output is desirable, which bypasses the need for intricate preference annotation altogether. In this work, we adapt the preference alignment optimization method for Vision-Language-Action models. Through an adaptive reweighting approach, we mitigate the irreversible interactions and token probability mismatch challenges when transferring preference learning methods from LLMs to VLA models. 

2.3 Human-robot Interactive Learning 

Interactive imitation learning [ 1, 7] has been proposed to refine robot actions through human feedback. While prior research [ 17 , 23 , 35 ] necessitates constant human supervision to intervene in the robot’s actions, more recent studies [ 14 , 22 , 46 ] have introduced dynamic models for automatic failure detection and real-time monitoring. In contrast, RLIF [ 26 ] leverages human intervention signals as rewards for off-policy RL, while HIL-SERL [ 27 ] presents a human-in-the-loop, vision-based RL system tailored for dexterous manipulation tasks. However, these RL approaches encounter difficulties in large-scale VLA model training, primarily due to unstable gradient optimization. In this work, we propose the action preference optimization method to ensure the stable optimization of policies from action-level preferences captured during interaction. 

## 3 Method 

In this section, we introduce Action Preference Optimization (APO), a method designed to facilitate continuous iterative improvement of Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models. As detailed in Algo-rithm 1, APO aligns the model with human preferences gathered through human-robot collaboration deployment within environment. 

3.1 Human-robot Collaboration Deployment 

To ensure reliable deployment and interaction trajectory collection, our method is founded on the human-robot collaboration framework for real-time intervention and interaction data acquisition. We first collect an expert demonstration dataset De = {τ ie}i=Ni=1 , where each trajectory τ ie consists of observation-action pairs with expert annotations: τ ie = {(oit, a it, c it)}t=Tt=1 , where cit = 1 indicates that 

ait is executed by human expert. We employ behavior cloning to fine-tune the pretrained VLA model 3on these expert demonstrations, obtaining an initial base policy π0 

> θ

. This policy is then deployed for interaction trajectory collection. During policy execution, the human operator monitors policy execution and intervenes when the policy encounters challenging scenarios. Through this process, we could collect a set of interaction trajectories Dh = {τ ih}i=Mi=i , where cit = 2 represents the action is corrected by human intervention while cit = 1 denotes the action is executed by policy. Further, we re-label the interaction trajectories to categorize the actions taken in the K steps preceding human interventions as undesirable, annotated with cit = 0 . For each trajectory, we discretize the continuous action a into discrete action token ˆa.Finally, we combine the expert demonstrations De and the interaction dataset Dh for further robotic action preference optimization. 

3.2 Action Preference Optimization 

To maximize the utility of sub-optimal interaction trajectories and ensure stable fine-tuning of the VLA model, we adopt the preference alignment optimization method to guide the model to learn from corrections and avoid failures. Although previous Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF) methods [ 2, 34 ] have proven effective in LLM fine-tuning, there are additional challenges for the VLA models preference optimization in robotic manipulation: • The irreversible robotic manipulation process makes it challenging to acquire meaningful paired positive-negative actions under the same observational conditions. • The mapping of continuous robotic actions to discrete tokens by autoregressive VLAs causes a mismatch between token probability and continuous action errors, complicating preference optimization in action token prediction. To address these issues, we adopt Kahneman & Tversky’s prospect theory [ 40 ] for preference alignment optimization with binary desirability signals and propose an adaptive reweighting method to bridge the gap between discrete token prediction and continuous action regression. We first estimate the reward function rθ of our model πθ as standard approach [31, 34, 37]: 

rθ (o, ˆa) = log πθ (ˆ a|o)

πref (ˆ a|o) , (1) where ˆa is the discrete action token and the reference model πref is the base model πiθ at the beginning of each deployment-optimization loop shown in algorithm 1. Following [ 11 , 40 ], we formulate the utility function v as below to estimate the relative gain on the robotic data: 

v(o, ˆa) = 

λD σ (rθ (o, ˆa) − z0) if ˆa ∼ ˆadesirable 

λU σ (z0 − rθ (o, ˆa)) if ˆa ∼ ˆaundesirable , (2) where λD and λU are utilized for importance sampling, the σ is the sigmoid function. To ensure that the model πθ does not deviate excessively from the reference model πref , a penalty term z0 is introduced. This term is defined as the KL-Divergence between πθ and πref : z0 = KL (πθ || πref ).Incorporating z0 into the optimization process guides the model to learn from preference pair data while simultaneously preserving knowledge acquired from prior models. We employ the following loss function L to optimize the model πθ using preference optimization with desirability signals: 

L(πθ , π ref ) = Ex,y ∼Dh [−v(x, y )] . (3) By minimizing the loss function, we aim for the model πθ to get higher rewards for desirable pairs while avoiding predicting undesirable actions, in comparison to the reference model πref .However, directly applying the preference alignment optimization from LLMs to autoregressive VLA models is problematic, primarily due to the differences in their respective token definitions. While word tokens correspond to distinct subwords, action tokens necessitate a non-differentiable mapping to continuous ground truth actions. This creates a discrepancy between the token classification probabilities and the regression loss associated with the continuous robotic actions. To bridge the gap between token classification and continuous action regression in autoregressive VLA models, we introduce an adaptive reweighting method. This approach guides the model to 4prioritize samples exhibiting large regression errors by first estimating the L1 loss of the continuous action l for each sample, followed by batch-level normalization as detailed below: 

wi = li

Pi=Bi=1 li

. (4) The normalized weighting scheme operates by: 1) for desirable data, increasing the weight of samples with high action prediction errors, and 2) for undesirable data, increasing the weight of samples whose actions are proximate to the failure actions. By adaptively adjusting the values of λD and λU

in Equation 1 using the normalized weights, we gain fine-grained control over the relative influence of each sample during training: 

λD = 1 − e−βD ∗w, (5) 

λU = e−βU ∗w. (6) By incorporating preference alignment optimization via sample-wise weight refinement, we enhance the performance and optimization stability of the VLA model, when learning from sub-optimal manipulation correction trajectories. In conclusion, we propose the action preference optimization method as demonstrated in algorithm 1. This approach leverages the human-robot collaboration deployment for reliable task execution and interaction trajectories collection, while the action preference optimization process provides stable autoregressive VLA optimization with adaptive reweighting. Through iterative human-robot collabo-ration deployment and action preference optimization, we could achieve continual improvement from interaction with environments for autoregressive VLA models. 

Algorithm 1 Action Preference Optimization 

1: Notations: 

2: De: expert demonstrations, Dh: interaction dataset, π: interaction policy 

3: Warm-start phase 

4: Collect De ← { τ e 

> 1

, . . . , τ eN }

5: Initialize BC policy π0

> θ

6: θ∗ ← arg max θ E(o,a )∼D e

log π0 

> θ

(a|o)

7: D0 

> h

←− D e

8: Deployment-optimization loop 

9: for i ← 0 to X do 

πref ← πiθ

Di+1  

> h

← DEPLOYMENT (πiθ , Dih)

πi+1  

> θ

← OPTIMIZATION (πiθ , π ref , Di+1  

> h

)

10: end for 

11: function DEPLOYMENT (πθ , Dh)

12: for n interaction rollouts do 

13: while task does not succeed do 

14: if human intervenes then 

15: at ←− human, c t ←− 2

16: ct−K:t−1 ← 0

17: else 

18: at ←− πθ (ot), c t ←− 1

19: end if 

20: τ hi ←− τ hi ∪ (ot, a t, c t)

21: end while 

22: Dh ←− D h ∪ τ hi

23: end for 

24: return Dh

25: end function 

26: function OPTIMIZATION (πθ ,πref ,Dh)

27: for n gradient steps do 

28: Balanced Sample (oi, a i, c i)i=Bi=1 ∼ D h

29: li ←− | πθ (oi) − ai|1

30: wi ←− liPi=Bi=1 li

31: if ci̸ = 0 then 

λDi = 1 − e−βD ∗wi

32: else 

λUi = e−βU ∗wi

33: end if 

34: θ∗ = arg max θ E[−v(o, a, π θ , π ref , λ D , λ U )] 

35: end for 

36: return πθ∗

37: end function 

54 Experiments 

To comprehensively evaluate our action preference optimization method for effective downstream adaptation, we propose experiments to validate the following questions: • How effective is APO at promoting adaptation to in-distribution scenarios? Section 4.2 • Does APO maintain effective learning performance in novel scenarios despite various disruptions? Section 4.3 • Does APO demonstrate the ability to achieve iterative improvement during deployment? Section 4.4 • How well does APO generalize to different VLA models? Scetion 4.5 • Could APO be applied in fine-grained real-world scenarios? Section 4.6 • To what extent does the action-level preference optimization method enable APO to learn action correction? Section 4.7 

4.1 Experiment Settings Implementation Details. In this work, we fine-tune the OpenVLA [ 41 ] model for target manipulation tasks as the base model. We employ LoRA [ 16 ] for parameter-efficient tuning, configuring rank 

r = 32 with a batch size of 16 across 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. Further, we deploy the base model to interact with environments, where human operators perform real-time corrective interventions via a SpaceMouse device to rectify failures during execution. We set K = 10 to identify and annotate undesirable behaviors automatically. The human-assisted interaction trajectory is shown in Figure 1, which is segmented into robotic automatic execution, the failure action, and the human intervention types by the timing of human correction. Based on the interaction trajectories collected during task execution, we fine-tune the base model πref with our action preference optimization method, using a learning rate of 5e-5 and a batch size of 8 across 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. To ensure the stability of preference alignment training, we employ balanced sampling to ensure that each batch contains 50% expert actions, 25% human intervention actions, and 25% failure actions. 

Figure 2: The demonstration of our human-assisted interaction trajectory. 

Simulation Environments Details. For a comprehensive evaluation, we validate these methods on fine-grained manipulation tasks within the RoboMimic [ 29 ] simulation environment, such as ’make coffee’ and ’toy assembly’. In the RoboMimic environment, we fine-tune the pretrained OpenVLA model for these 4 long-horizon manipulation tasks with 300 expert demonstrations. To optimize policy with human preferences, we collect 50 trajectories per task under different seeds for RoboMimic tasks. For evaluation, we conduct 50 trials under three unseen seeds for each task, and report the average success rate. 

4.2 Comparison Experiments 

We compare APO with other approaches to evaluate the effectiveness for VLA model fine-tuning. To ensure fairness, we fine-tune OpenVLA [ 18 ] for manipulation tasks as a base model and improve the base model with other comparison methods. • Dagger [ 35 ]: We mix the expert demonstrations with interaction trajectories, fine-tuning the base model using a behavior cloning objective. • Sirius [ 23 ]: we apply sample reweighting to prioritize human intervention data and fine-tune the base model using a weighted behavior cloning loss. • DPO [ 34 ]: We generate paired negative samples for interaction trajectories by perturbing the actions predicted from the base model with Gaussian noise, and fine-tune the base model using these paired data with the DPO method. 6Random Stick                       

> (a) Position Disruption in Square_D0 (b) Background Disruption in StackTrhee_D0 (c) Texture Disruption in ThreePiece_D0
> White Bg. Red Block Fixed Stick Gray Bg. Wooden Block

Figure 3: In the position disruption setting, we change the position of the stick from a fixed point to a random position from the rectangle in the Square_D0 task as illustrated in (a). In the background disruption setting, we replace the background with the gray one in the StackThree_D0 task as shown in (b). In the texture disruption setting, we replace the red blocks with the wooden ones. • TPO [ 49 ]: We select positive and negative samples in interaction trajectories based on the timing of intervention, then fine-tune model with trajectory-wise preference optimization. • KTO [ 11 ]: We select positive and negative samples in interaction trajectories based on the timing of intervention. Then, we sample positive and negative trajectories and optimize the base model with KTO, with the constraint z0 = KL (πθ || πref ).As shown in Table 1, we first compare the behavior cloning objective methods. The results reveal that after fine-tuning with interaction data, these methods fail to outperform the base model, which demonstrates that existing behavior cloning approaches struggle to achieve efficient adaptation in the context of large-scale VLA models. A key challenge stems from the distribution shift between expert trajectories and interaction trajectories. Without mechanisms to retain the base model’s knowledge under the under standard behavior cloning objectives, this shift makes it particularly difficult for large-scale VLA models to effectively fit the complex, multimodal distribution arising from the combined expert and interaction datasets. We further provide results of the preference optimization based methods. By integrating a regulariza-tion constraint with the reference model πref , these methods could maintain useful knowledge from the reference model while achieving improvement from interaction trajectories. Among all compared preference learning based methods, DPO yields the weakest performance. This result stems from its exclusive reliance on synthetic paired failure actions for optimization, which lacks exposure to real-world errors essential for teaching robots mistake avoidance through interaction. On the other side, TPO fails to deliver stable performance gains on multiple tasks while APO attains stable performance gains relative to the base model. The TPO method employs negative samples to regularize model preference alignment optimization, but introduces instability through random sampling. In contrast, APO utilizes KL divergence to estimate the mean margin between the updated model and the reference model, which not only enables more stable learning but also better preserves prior knowledge. Compared with KTO, APO leverages the adaptive reweighting method to achieve more precise control over the importance weights of both positive and negative samples, delivering more notable performance improvements. Table 1: Comparison experiment results across 4 manipulation tasks in RoboMimic Simulation. The results demonstrate that our adaptive reweighting preference optimization method achieves stable improvement compared with other behavior cloning and preference optimization methods. Methods Coffee_D0 StackThree_D0 ThreePieceAssebly_D0 Square_D0 Mean Base policy 44% 46% 44% 28% 40.5% Dagger [35] 42% 50% 36% 28% 39.0% Sirius [23] 34% 52% 34% 38% 39.5% DPO [34] 52% 46% 28% 22% 37.0% TPO [49] 54% 54% 40% 18% 41.5% KTO[11] 48% 52% 46% 32% 43.5% APO 60% 54% 46% 32% 48.0% 

7Table 2: The results on disruption scenarios.                                 

> Methods Pos Dis. Bg Dis. Tex Dis. Mean Base policy 12% 42% 10% 21.3% Dagger 18% 46% 4% 22.7% Sirius 12% 42% 2% 18.7% DPO 14% 26% 2% 14.0% TPO 18% 32% 8% 19.3% KTO 20% 46% 6% 24.0% APO 26% 46% 12% 28.0%

Table 3: The results on original tasks.                                                      

> Methods Square StackThree ThreePiece Mean Base policy 28% 46% 44% 39.3% Dagger 16% 46% 30% 30.7% Sirius 18% 48% 18% 28% DPO 20% 50% 30% 33.3% TPO 30% 36% 40% 35.3% KTO 30% 46% 42% 39.3% APO 34% 62% 40% 45.3% (a) Coffee_D0 Success Rate (b) StackThree _D0 Success Rate (c) Human Intervention Frequency
>   
>  
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
>   
> 
>  
>   
>  
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
>   
> 
>  
>  #!
> "
> 
> 
> 
> 
> #   #!$#  "   
>  
> 

Figure 4: Lifelong learning results of APO method. 

4.3 Generalization to Novel Tasks 

In this section, we assess APO’s generalization capability under three novel scenarios, as illustrated in Figure 3. (1) Position Disruption : For the Square_D0 task, we replace the fixed initial stick position with randomized placements within a bounded operational area. (2) Background Disruption : In the StackThree_D0 task, we substitute the default white background with a gray one. (3) Texture Disruption : In the ThreePiece_D0 task, the original red blocks are transmuted to wood-grain visual properties. These experiments systematically evaluate robustness against spatial, background, and visual texture variations. To fine-tune the base model on novel disruption scenarios, we collect 20 interaction trajectories under disruption scenarios and combine them with 20 expert demonstrations from the original task for subsequent fine-tuning. Our objective is to develop an action preference optimization method that facilitates continuous improvement, enabling performance enhancements in novel disruption scenarios while retaining original task capabilities during model fine-tuning. Thus, we evaluate the performance of the fine-tuned model across both disruption scenarios and original scenarios. As shown in Tabel 2, the base policy exhibits some degree of performance degradation in disruption scenarios. However, the performance decline is relatively minor in cases of background disruption, whereas disruptions in object texture and position significantly impact performance. Both behavior cloning methods and preference optimization methods struggle to achieve significant performance improvements in novel disruption scenarios. In contrast, APO can effectively adapt to new disruption scenarios through adaptive reweighting. Table 3 presents the performance of the optimized model after being fine-tuned from disruption data on the original task. The results reveal that behavior cloning methods exhibit severe catastrophic forgetting, resulting in substantial performance degradation. By contrast, the preference optimization method achieves mitigated performance decline with the constraints of the reference model. Besides, APO utilizes adaptive reweighting to effectively integrate knowledge from both expert demonstrations and interaction trajectories. This mechanism not only facilitates learning from diverse data sources but also leads to improved performance on the original task. 

4.4 The Performance of Lifelong Learning 

To investigate whether APO can iteratively improve via environment interaction, we deploy APO to interact with environments while updating the model every 20 interaction rollouts. e provide compar-ison results using a behavior cloning policy trained with the same number of expert demonstrations as our baseline. For each updated model, we conduct 50 trials and report the success rate. 8Table 4: The results on π0-FAST model.                

> Methods Coffee_D0 StackThree_D0 Insert Square Base policy 68% 64% 85% Dagger 64% 66% 85% TPO 48% 52% 90% APO 76% 74% 95%

Table 5: The results on real-world experiments.                                        

> Methods In Dis. Pos Dis. Bg Dis. Tex Dis. Base policy 65% 25% 10% 25% Dagger 65% 10% 10% 25% TPO 75% 40% 20% 45% APO 85% 55% 30% 55% (a) Expert Demonstration
> (b) Position Disruption (d) Texture Disruption (c) Background Disruption
> Insert the square into the stick
> In Dis. Pos Dis. Black Stick Green Stick Black Stick Brown Bg.

Figure 5: Demonstrations of real-world experiments with disruption settings. As shown in Figure 4(a-b), APO achieves superior performance compared to the baseline, demonstrat-ing its ability to effectively leverage sub-optimal human intervention trajectories for iterative model improvement. When the base policy exhibits diminishing improvement with increasing expert demon-strations, APO enables continual performance gains from the interaction trajectories. Besides, this improvement trend is accompanied by a corresponding reduction in the required human intervention ratio, as shown in Figure 4(c) 

4.5 Generalization to various VLA models 

To validate that APO can be adapted to different VLA models, we applied APO to fine-tune the 

π0-FAST [ 33 ] model. π0-FAST applies discrete cosine transform encoding to encode the action chunking into discrete tokens for VLA training. To adopt this model for downstream tasks, We regenerate the action tokenizer with 5 action chunking step for each task. As shown in Table 1, the base model could achieve a higher success rate compared with the OpenVLA model, benefiting from its ability to predict action chunking for robotic manipulation. Further, we compare APO with both the behavior cloning method and preference optimization method, the results demonstrate that APO could achieve consistent improvement for the π0-FAST fine-tuning. The results prove that APO could be applied to the fine-tuning of various VLA models, achieving consistent performance gains. 

4.6 Real-world Experiments 

In this work, we conduct the challenging fine-grained robotic manipulation task “Insert the square into the stick” as shown in Figure 2(a), which requires the robot to grasp the square and precisely insert into the stick. To collect expert demonstrations, we utilize the spacemouse device to gather 100 high-quality trajectories at an action frequency of 20 Hz . We fine-tune the OpenVLA model with the collected demonstration as the base model. Further, we deploy the base model to interact with environments and propose the real-time human-in-the-loop interventions to collect 20 interaction trajectories for subsequent action preference optimization. All methods are evaluated under the same experimental setup, and we report the average success rate from 20 trials. For a comprehensive evaluation in real-world scenarios, APO was also tested on the “hang cup on the rack” and “put lemon on the plate” tasks. The corresponding results are detailed in the supplementary material. To comprehensively evaluate APO, experiments are conducted not only under in-distribution but also across three distinct disruption settings as shown in Figure 2(b-e): (1) Position Disruption: We change the position distribution of the stick. (2) Background Disruption: We replace the tablecloth from white to brown. (3) Texture Disruption: We replace the black stick to the green one. 9As demonstrated in Table 5, APO demonstrated robust adaptability to these downstream disruption scenarios. The results empirically validate the method’s practical utility for real-world deployment in unstructured environments. We also adopt APO to fine-tune the π0-FAST model in the real world scenario. The results in Table 1 prove APO could achieve consistent performance gains over other methods. 

4.7 Correction from Failure scenarios 

In this work, we propose the APO method that enables models not only to avoid failure modes but also to self-correct within failure scenarios. As shown in Figure 6, we provide examples of failure correction across multiple tasks, demonstrating the corrective strategies learned by APO. For instance, in Figure 6(a,b), when the model initially fails to grasp an object, APO identifies the failure and initiates a re-grasp attempt. Similarly, in Figure 6(c), when a precise insertion operation is obstructed, APO learns to iteratively adjust its gripper position until the insertion is successfully completed. These examples illustrate that APO has successfully learned to recover from common failure scenarios, which directly contributes to its improved overall performance. 

Figure 6: The rollout trajectory of APO. As indicated by the bold red and green boxes, APO can autonomously correct form failure scenarios. 

## 5 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduce the Action Preference Optimization (APO) method to fully exploit valuable information in failure trajectories while maintaining the stability required for large-scale VLA models. This method builds on a human-robot collaboration framework for reliable deployment, and utilizes an adaptive reweighting preference optimization algorithm with action-level binary desirability signals for stable VLA model optimization. Through APO, we could promote continuous improvement during the deployment of VLA models. We hope APO could bring insights for efficient and effective VLA model adaptation on downstream manipulation tasks. 

Discussion and Future Work. While our work study the preference alignment optimization for VLA models, the experiments are based solely on autoregressive VLA models. Future work should explore a broader range of VLA frameworks, including regression-based approaches and diffusion policy models, to ensure the generalizability of our method across different architectures. 10 6 Acknowledgement 

The project was supported by the fund for building world-class universities (disciplines) of Renmin University of China, and CCF-Zhipu.AI Large Model Innovation Fund. The project was also supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (NO.62106272). 

## References 

[1] Brenna D. Argall, Sonia Chernova, Manuela Veloso, and Brett Browning. A survey of robot learning from demonstration. Robotics and Autonomous Systems , 57(5):469–483, 2009. [2] Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 ,2022. [3] Johan Bjorck, Fernando Castañeda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi Fan, Yu Fang, Dieter Fox, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, et al. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14734 , 2025. [4] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. pi0 : A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 , 2024. [5] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choro-manski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 ,2023. [6] Qingwen Bu, Jisong Cai, Li Chen, Xiuqi Cui, Yan Ding, Siyuan Feng, Shenyuan Gao, Xindong He, Xu Huang, Shu Jiang, et al. Agibot world colosseo: A large-scale manipulation platform for scalable and intelligent embodied systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06669 , 2025. [7] Carlos Celemin, Rodrigo Pérez-Dattari, Eugenio Chisari, Giovanni Franzese, Leandro de Souza Rosa, Ravi Prakash, Zlatan Ajanovi´ c, Marta Ferraz, Abhinav Valada, Jens Kober, et al. Interactive imitation learning in robotics: A survey. Foundations and Trends® in Robotics ,10(1-2):1–197, 2022. [8] Chi-Lam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Ya Jing, Tao Kong, Hang Li, Yifeng Li, Yuxiao Liu, Hongtao Wu, Jiafeng Xu, Yichu Yang, et al. Gr-2: A generative video-language-action model with web-scale knowledge for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06158 , 2024. [9] Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [10] Yuchen Cui, Siddharth Karamcheti, Raj Palleti, Nidhya Shivakumar, Percy Liang, and Dorsa Sadigh. No, to the right: Online language corrections for robotic manipulation via shared autonomy. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction , HRI ’23, page 93–101, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. [11] Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306 , 2024. [12] Hao-Shu Fang, Hongjie Fang, Zhenyu Tang, Jirong Liu, Chenxi Wang, Junbo Wang, Haoyi Zhu, and Cewu Lu. Rh20t: A comprehensive robotic dataset for learning diverse skills in one-shot. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.00595 , 2023. [13] Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023. 11 [14] Cem Gokmen, Daniel Ho, and Mohi Khansari. Asking for help: Failure prediction in behavioral cloning through value approximation. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 5821–5828. IEEE, 2023. [15] Ryan Hoque, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Satvik Sharma, Karthik Dharmarajan, Brijen Thanan-jeyan, Pieter Abbeel, and Ken Goldberg. Fleet-dagger: Interactive robot fleet learning with scalable human supervision. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 368–380. PMLR, 2023. [16] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR ,1(2):3, 2022. [17] Michael Kelly, Chelsea Sidrane, Katherine Driggs-Campbell, and Mykel J Kochenderfer. Hg-dagger: Interactive imitation learning with human experts. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 8077–8083. IEEE, 2019. [18] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. [19] Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Peiyuan Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei Liu, et al. Llava-onevision: Easy visual task transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03326 , 2024. [20] Quanyi Li, Zhenghao Peng, and Bolei Zhou. Efficient learning of safe driving policy via human-ai copilot optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10341 , 2022. [21] Kong Ling-Huan, He Wei, Chen Wen-Shi, Zhang Hui, and Wang Yao-Nan. Dynamic movement primitives based robot skills learning. Machine Intelligence Research , 20:396–407, 2023. [22] Huihan Liu, Shivin Dass, Roberto Martín-Martín, and Yuke Zhu. Model-based runtime moni-toring with interactive imitation learning. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 4154–4161. IEEE, 2024. [23] Huihan Liu, Soroush Nasiriany, Lance Zhang, Zhiyao Bao, and Yuke Zhu. Robot learning on the job: Human-in-the-loop autonomy and learning during deployment. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. [24] Songming Liu, Lingxuan Wu, Bangguo Li, Hengkai Tan, Huayu Chen, Zhengyi Wang, Ke Xu, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Rdt-1b: a diffusion foundation model for bimanual manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07864 , 2024. [25] Jingxian Lu, Wenke Xia, Dong Wang, Zhigang Wang, Bin Zhao, Di Hu, and Xuelong Li. Koi: Accelerating online imitation learning via hybrid key-state guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02912 , 2024. [26] Jianlan Luo, Perry Dong, Yuexiang Zhai, Yi Ma, and Sergey Levine. Rlif: Interactive imitation learning as reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12996 , 2023. [27] Jianlan Luo, Charles Xu, Jeffrey Wu, and Sergey Levine. Precise and dexterous robotic manipulation via human-in-the-loop reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21845 ,2024. [28] Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Roberto Martín-Martín, Yuke Zhu, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. Human-in-the-loop imitation learning using remote teleoperation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.06733 , 2020. [29] Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni, Li Fei-Fei, Silvio Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Martín-Martín. What matters in learning from offline human demonstrations for robot manipulation. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.03298 ,2021. [30] Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332 , 2021. 12 [31] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems ,35:27730–27744, 2022. [32] Xincheng Pang, Wenke Xia, Zhigang Wang, Bin Zhao, Di Hu, Dong Wang, and Xuelong Li. Depth helps: Improving pre-trained rgb-based policy with depth information injection. In 

2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 7251–7256, Oct 2024. [33] Karl Pertsch, Kyle Stachowicz, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Suraj Nair, Quan Vuong, Oier Mees, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Fast: Efficient action tokenization for vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09747 , 2025. [34] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:53728–53741, 2023. [35] Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth interna-tional conference on artificial intelligence and statistics , pages 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011. [36] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [37] Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:3008–3021, 2020. [38] Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213 , 2024. [39] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timo-thée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , 2023. [40] Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty. Journal of Risk and uncertainty , 5:297–323, 1992. [41] Quan Vuong, Sergey Levine, Homer Rich Walke, Karl Pertsch, Anikait Singh, Ria Doshi, Charles Xu, Jianlan Luo, Liam Tan, Dhruv Shah, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models. In Towards Generalist Robots: Learning Paradigms for Scalable Skill Acquisition@ CoRL2023 , 2023. [42] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022. [43] Junjie Wen, Yichen Zhu, Jinming Li, Zhibin Tang, Chaomin Shen, and Feifei Feng. Dexvla: Vision-language model with plug-in diffusion expert for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05855 , 2025. [44] Wenke Xia, Ruoxuan Feng, Dong Wang, and Di Hu. Phoenix: A motion-based self-reflection framework for fine-grained robotic action correction. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR) , pages 6981–6990, June 2025. [45] Wenke Xia, Dong Wang, Xincheng Pang, Zhigang Wang, Bin Zhao, Di Hu, and Xuelong Li. Kinematic-aware prompting for generalizable articulated object manipulation with llms. In 

2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 2073–2080, 2024. 13 [46] Esen Yel and Nicola Bezzo. Fast run-time monitoring, replanning, and recovery for safe autonomous system operations. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 1661–1667. IEEE, 2019. [47] Zheng Ying, Yao Lei, Su Yuejiao, Zhang Yi, Wang Yi, Zhao Sicheng, Zhang Yiyi, and Chau Lap-Pui. A survey of embodied learning for object-centric robotic manipulation. Machine Intelligence Research , 22:588–626, 2025. [48] Jia Zeng, Qingwen Bu, Bangjun Wang, Wenke Xia, Li Chen, Hao Dong, Haoming Song, Dong Wang, Di Hu, Ping Luo, et al. Learning manipulation by predicting interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00439 , 2024. [49] Zijian Zhang, Kaiyuan Zheng, Zhaorun Chen, Joel Jang, Yi Li, Siwei Han, Chaoqi Wang, Mingyu Ding, Dieter Fox, and Huaxiu Yao. Grape: Generalizing robot policy via preference alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19309 , 2024. [50] Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593 , 2019. 14 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have claimed the contributions in Abstract Section and Introduction Section 1. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have discussed the limitations of our work in the Conclusion Section 5. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [NA] 15 Justification: In this work, we apply Kahneman & Tversky’s prospect theory to prefer-ence alignment of Vision-Language-Action models, without introducing new theoretical contributions Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have reported the implementation details to support reproduction in the Experiment Settings Section 4.1. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

16 Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have released the data and code for reproduction in the supplemental material. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have provided the implementation details in Experiment Settings Sce-tion 4.1. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We conduct the main experiments across 3 random seeds and report the results. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). 17 • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have provided the compute resources in Experiment Settings Section 4.1. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: We follow the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [Yes] Justification: In this work, we propose a human-robot collaboration framework to ensure op-erational safety during robotic deployment, facilitating the broader adoption of autonomous robotic systems in real-world applications. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. 18 • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: Our model and dataset pose no such risks. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We follow the license of OpenVLA model. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. 19 • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We would release our code, model, and corresponding human intervention trajectories. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: We collect human intervention trajectories by ourselves. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: This work does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. 20 • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [Yes] Justification: We utilize the LLMs as the foundation models for our further Vision-Language-Action Models fine-tuning. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 21 SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 

## 1 Supplementary Video 

In this work, we propose the action preference optimization method to correct interaction failure and achieve stable optimization for VLA models. In the supplementary video, we illustrate our human-assisted interaction trajectories collection process as demonstrated in Figure 1. We also provide comparison videos against other methods, highlighting the effectiveness of our approach in both real-world and simulation scenarios. 

Figure 1: The demonstration of our human-assisted interaction trajectory. 

## 2 Human-assisted Collaboration Deployment 

In this work, we propose a human-assisted collaboration deployment framework to support reliable deployment and interaction trajectory collection. The blue block in Figure 1 illustrates the initial deployment of the base policy for autonomous environment interaction. However, the base policy is trained solely on expert demonstrations. When its predicted action causes failures, this model struggles to recover from these failure states, as shown in the red block. To address this, we provide human intervention to manually adjust the robotic arm’s movements for failure correction, as shown in the green blocks. Through this human-assisted approach, we ensure reliable deployment of the model in manipulation tasks. Furthermore, we annotate these interaction trajectories for subsequent preference learning. Specifically, we designate the last 10 actions before human intervention as undesirable data (repre-senting failure actions), while the remaining trajectories serve as desirable data. 

## 3 Implementation Details 

In our work, we build the utility function v as below to estimate the relative gain on the robotic data: 

v(o, ˆa) = 

λD σ (rθ (o, ˆa) − z0) if ˆa ∼ ˆadesirable 

λU σ (z0 − rθ (o, ˆa)) if ˆa ∼ ˆaundesirable , (1) where z0 = KL (πθ || πref ) to guide the model to learn from preference pair data while simultaneously preserving knowledge acquired from prior models. We compute the KL-divergence z0 by leveraging the KTO [ 11 ] method, which leverages mismatched sample pairs for KL estimation. Further, we ignore the reject reward of the gripper action token to prevent erroneous rejection of the same gripper state. 

## 4 More Real-world Experiments 

4.1 Generalization to various VLA models 

In this section, we adopt our method to fine-tune the π0-FAST model. As shown in Table 1, the 

π0-FAST model achieves a higher success rate, benefiting from its action chunking prediction. Besides, our method could achieve consistent performance gains in real-world experiments. Because our method needs to decode to continuous action for adaptive reweighting, however, the π0-FAST model may fail to decode predicted action tokens into meaningful continuous actions, thus when the predicted action token sequences cannot be decoded to x, we would set the weight as 1 to promote the model focus on predicting correct action token sequences. 22 (b) Put the lemon on the plate       

> (a) Hang the cup on the rack

Figure 2: The demonstrations of real-world experiments. Table 1: The results on π0-FAST model. Methods Square Base policy 85% Dagger 85% TPO 90% Ours 95% 

Table 2: The results on real-world experiments. Methods Hang Put Base policy 70% 85% Dagger 65% 85% TPO 75% 80% Ours 90% 100% 4.2 More real-world tasks 

In this section, we provide two more real-world experiments as shown in Figure 2. For each task, we collect 100 expert demonstrations to train the base policy. Further, we deploy the base policy to interact with environments and collect 20 human-intervened trajectories. We mix the 20 human-intervened trajectories with 20 expert demonstrations for model preference optimization. As shown in Table 2, our method could achieve better performance compared with other behavior cloning and preference optimization methods. 23