Title: 22327_Generalizable_Domain_Ada.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=ufKaXYJt1F

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# Generalizable Domain Adaptation for Sim-and-Real Policy Co-Training 

Shuo Cheng 1* Liqian Ma 1* Zhenyang Chen 1

Ajay Mandlekar 2† Caelan Garrett 2† Danfei Xu 1 

> 1

Georgia Institute of Technology 2 NVIDIA Corporation  

> *

and † denote equal contribution 

{shuocheng, mlq}@gatech.edu 

# Abstract 

Behavior cloning has shown promise for robot manipulation, but real-world demon-strations are costly to acquire at scale. While simulated data offers a scalable alternative, particularly with advances in automated demonstration generation, transferring policies to the real world is hampered by various simulation and real domain gaps. In this work, we propose a unified sim-and-real co-training frame-work for learning generalizable manipulation policies that primarily leverages simulation and only requires a few real-world demonstrations. Central to our ap-proach is learning a domain-invariant, task-relevant feature space. Our key insight is that aligning the joint distributions of observations and their corresponding ac-tions across domains provides a richer signal than aligning observations (marginals) alone. We achieve this by embedding an Optimal Transport (OT)-inspired loss within the co-training framework, and extend this to an Unbalanced OT framework to handle the imbalance between abundant simulation data and limited real-world examples. We validate our method on challenging manipulation tasks, showing it can leverage abundant simulation data to achieve up to a 30% improvement in the real-world success rate and even generalize to scenarios seen only in simulation .Project webpage: https://ot-sim2real.github.io/ .

# 1 Introduction 

Behavior cloning [ 1] is a promising approach for acquiring robot manipulation skills directly in the real world, due to its simplicity and effectiveness in mimicking expert demonstrations [ 2, 3]. However, achieving robust and generalizable performance requires collecting large-scale datasets [ 4, 5] across diverse environments, object configurations, and tasks. This data collection process is labor-intensive, time-consuming, and costly, posing significant challenges to scalability in real-world applications. Recently, with rapid advancements in physics simulators [ 6, 7 ], procedural scene generation [ 8, 9], and motion synthesis techniques [ 10 , 11 ], there has been growing interest in leveraging simulation as an alternative source of training data. These simulation-based approaches enable scalable and controllable data generation, allowing for diverse and abundant supervision at a fraction of the real-world cost. However, transferring policies trained in simulation to the physical world remains a non-trivial challenge due to sim-to-real gap—the discrepancies between the simulated and real-world environments that a policy encounters during execution. These differences can manifest in various forms, such as variations in visual appearance, sensor noise, and action dynamics [ 12 , 13 ]. In particular, learning visuomotor control policies that remain robust under changing perceptual conditions during real-world deployment continues to be an open area of research. Common strategies to bridge this domain gap include domain randomization [ 12 , 13 ] and data augmentation [ 14 , 15 ], though these often require careful tuning. Domain adaptation (DA) techniques         

> 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). Real-world Data
> •Small number of demos
> •Limited settings
> Simulation Data
> •Large number of demos
> •Diverse settings
> Densely covered by sim demos
> Optimal
> Transport
> Alignment
> Generalize to states seen only in sim
> Real-world Deployment
> Policy
> Co-Training
> Sparsely covered by real demos
> Shared Policy Latent Space

Figure 1: Sim-and-Real Co-Training with Optimal Transport . We use behavior cloning to train a real-world policy from sparse real-world and dense simulation demos. Leveraging Optimal Transport to align feature spaces, our method enables generalization to scenarios seen only in simulation. aim to explicitly align distributions, either at pixel [ 16 , 17 ] or feature levels [ 18 , 19 , 20 ]. However, many feature-level methods align only marginal observation distributions (e.g., MMD [ 18 , 19 ]), which can be insufficient for fine-grained manipulation alignment as it may not preserve action-relevant relationships across domains. More recently, sim-and-real co-training—simply training a single policy on mixed data from both domains [ 21 , 22 ]—has shown surprising effectiveness. We argue that while beneficial for data diversity, such co-training approaches typically lack explicit constraints for feature space alignment across domains, potentially hindering optimal transfer and generalization because they don’t enforce a consistent mapping of task-relevant structures. We present a unified sim-and-real co-training framework that explicitly learns a shared latent space where observations from simulation and the real world are aligned and preserve action-relevant infor-mation. Our key insight is that aligning the joint distributions of observations and their corresponding actions or task-relevant states across domains provides a direct signal for learning transferable features. Concretely, we leverage Optimal Transport (OT) [ 23 ] as an alignment objective to learn represen-tations where the geometric relationships crucial for action prediction are consistent, irrespective of whether the input comes from simulation or the real world. Further more, to robustly handle the 

data imbalance in co-training with abundant simulation data and limited real-world data, we further extend to an Unbalanced OT (UOT) formulation [ 24 , 25 ] and develop a temporally-aware sampling strategy to improve domain alignment learning in a mini-batch OT setting. 

Our contributions are : (1) a sim-and-real co-training framework that learns a domain-invariant yet task-salient latent space to improve real-world performance with abundant simulation data, (2) an Unbalanced Optimal Transport framework and temporally-aware sampling strategy to mitigate data imbalance and improve alignment quality in mini-batch OT training, (3) comprehensive experiments using both image and point-cloud modalities, evaluating sim-to-sim and sim-to-real transfer across diverse manipulation tasks, demonstrating up to a 30% average success rate improvement and achieving generalization to real-world scenarios for which the training data only appears in simulation. 

# 2 Related Work 

Behavior Cloning for Robot Manipulation. Behavior cloning (BC) trains policies to map ob-servations to actions by imitating expert demonstrations [ 2 , 26 , 27 , 28 ], offering an effective path to human-like manipulation skills. Generalization heavily depends on dataset diversity. While some efforts focus on large-scale real-world data collection [ 5 , 4 ] or more efficient collection tech-niques [ 29 , 30 , 31 ], this remains costly and time-consuming. Physical simulators provide a low-cost alternative, with automatic motion synthesis leveraging privileged information to generate large-scale simulated demonstrations [ 10 , 32 , 33 ]. Our work combines abundant simulated data with few real-world demonstrations to train robust BC policies. 

Sim-to-real Transfer and Co-training. Policies trained solely in simulation often underperform in the real world due to the sim-to-real gap—discrepancies in visual appearance and dynamics. For quasi-static manipulation, the visual domain gap is typically the primary bottleneck. Domain 2randomization exposes policies to varied simulated visual conditions to build robustness to real-world variability [ 13 , 34 , 35 ]. However, its success depends on how well randomized parameters cover true real-world distributions, often requiring manual tuning. Domain adaptation (DA) explicitly aligns source (simulation) and target (real) domains [ 36 , 37 ]. Pixel-level DA uses image translation to make simulated images resemble real ones [ 16 , 17 , 38 ]. Feature-level DA, which is often more scalable for end-to-end learning, focuses on learning domain-invariant representations [ 19 , 20 , 18 , 39 , 40 ]. Sim-and-real co-training, where a policy is jointly trained on mixed data [ 21 , 22 ], offers a simple and effective alternative. While co-training enhances generalization through data diversity, it typically lacks explicit constraints to align learned feature spaces across domains. We build upon co-training by incorporating feature-level domain adaptation via Optimal Transport to promote latent space alignment, thereby improving real-world policy performance. 

Optimal Transport for Domain Adaptation. Optimal Transport (OT) offers a principled frame-work for aligning distributions, widely adopted for domain adaptation [ 23 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 ]. Traditional OT methods compute a transport plan between source and target samples, then train a new model on the transported source. Most relevant to us is DeepJDOT [ 47 ], which builds on JDOT [ 44 ] to align joint distributions of features and (pseudo) labels for unsupervised domain adaptation, where target labels are unavailable. Our work builds on these principles for sim-and-real co-training imitation. Unlike unsupervised DA, we leverage available action or state labels from limited real-world demonstrations as “soft” supervision to guide a more task-relevant alignment of joint observation-label distributions across domains. To robustly handle the inherent data imbal-ance between abundant simulation and scarce real data, we incorporate an Unbalanced OT (UOT) loss [ 24 ] into our co-training framework and develop a temporally-aware sampling strategy to improve mini-batch UOT training. 

# 3 Preliminaries and Problem Setting 

Our method builds on the principle of Optimal Transport (OT) for aligning two empirical distributions. Let U = {ui}ni=1 and V = {vj }mj=1 represent the data points drawn from a source domain and a 

target domain, with corresponding empirical distributions p = Pni=1 piδui and q = Pmj=1 qj δvj .We define the ground cost matrix C = ( Ci,j ) ∈ Rn×m with Ci,j = c(ui, v j ), where c(·, ·) is a cost function, which is often defined as squared Euclidean distance. Optimal Transport (OT) seeks to find an optimal plan Π that maps the distribution p to q that minimizes the displacement cost Wc(p, q):

Wc(p, q) = min 

> Π∈Rn×m
> +

⟨Π, C ⟩F , s.t. Π1m = p, Π⊤1n = q. (1) 

3.1 Problem Setting: Sim-and-Real Policy Co-Training 

We address the challenge of learning robust real-world robotic manipulation policies π. Our approach minimizes the need for extensive real-world data collection by primarily leveraging abundant sim-ulation data alongside a small set of real-world demonstrations. This is framed as a sim-and-real co-training problem [ 22 , 48 ], where a single policy is trained on data from both domains. Specifically, we consider a source domain (simulation, denoted src ) and a target domain (real-world, denoted 

tgt ). We model the domains as Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) that share an underlying, generally unobserved, state space S and an action space A. The policy receives observations comprising high-dimensional visual input o ∈ O (e.g., RGB images, 3D point clouds) generated by the emission function E : S 7 → O , together with low-dimensional proprioceptive information x ∈ X (e.g., robot joint angles, end-effector pose). 

Domain Gaps. The central challenge is the domain gap, particularly the visual observation gap . For the same underlying robot and environment state s ∈ S , visual observations emitted in simulation, 

osrc = Esrc (s), can differ significantly from those in the real world, otgt = Etgt (s). This discrepancy arises from factors like variations in visual appearance (textures, lighting), sensor noise, and rendering artifacts (e.g., differences between simulated ray casting and real-world light transport). As a result, the marginal observation distributions differ between the domains, namely Psrc (osrc )̸ = Ptgt (otgt ).In contrast, actions a and proprioceptive states x are assumed to be largely consistent for a given 

s due to consistent data generation strategies (discussed next) and accurate robot state estimation. While differences in dynamics also contribute to the domain gaps, our focus on learning quasi-static prehensile manipulation tasks from human-sourced demonstrations means that the dynamics gap is typically less dominant than the observation gap. 3𝐿 ஻஼    

> 𝐿 ௎ை்
> Sim Batch
> Real Batch
> Sim Demos
> Real Demos
> థ
> థ
> ఏ
> 𝐿 ஻஼ ఏ
> OT Map Compute
> joint cost 𝐶 థ(⋅)
> Action Space
> DTW Distance
> Temporally Aligned Sampling (Sec 4.3) Feature Alignment via OT (Sec 4.1, 4.2) Joint Co-Training (Sec 4.4)

Figure 2: Method Overview. Our sim-and-real co-training framework learns a domain-invariant latent space to improve real-world performance using abundant simulation demos and a small number of real-world demos. It leverages an Unbalanced Optimal Transport loss and a temporal sampling strategy to address data imbalance and improve alignment quality during mini-batch training. 

Data Sources and Data Imbalance. In the source (simulation) domain, we leverage the ability to automatically generate a large dataset of Nsrc trajectories, Dsrc = {(oisrc , x isrc , a isrc )}Nsrc  

> i=1

.Specifically, we leverage an automated demonstration generation tool MimicGen [ 10 ], which utilizes privileged information available in simulation to create a diverse set of experiences covering a broad underlying state space, Ssrc . MimicGen populates synthetic demonstrations based on a handful of human demonstrations, which ensures that the generated data is behaviorally consistent with human demonstrations. We collect a limited number of Ntgt demonstrations, Dtgt = {(ojtgt , x jtgt , a jtgt )}Ntgt 

> j=1

(where Nsrc ≫ Ntgt ), typically through human teleoperation. These real-world demonstrations will naturally cover a much smaller and potentially distinct subset of states, Stgt . This difference in data coverage leads to the challenge of partial data overlap . While we assume there is a region of states common to both Ssrc and Stgt where direct alignment is possible, a significant portion of Ssrc (our rich simulated data) will not have corresponding real-world demonstrations in Stgt . Conversely, Stgt 

might contain details specific to real world (e.g., demonstration behaviors). Effectively leveraging the entirety of Dsrc for real-world performance, especially for states outside the direct sim-real overlap in demonstrations, is the problem we address. 

Objective: Generalizable Domain Adaptation. Our goal is to learn a single, generalizable policy 

πθ (a|z, x ) and an observation encoder fϕ : Osrc ∪ O tgt → Z . This encoder maps high-dimensional visual observations o from both source and target domains to a shared latent space Z. The primary objective is to achieve high policy performance in the target (real-world) domain, especially in scenarios not explicitly covered by the limited real-world demonstrations Dtgt . This entails two objectives . First, for states within the overlapping regions of Ssrc and Stgt , we aim to learn high-quality embeddings z = fϕ(o) that are well-aligned across domains, such that fϕ(osrc ) ≈ fϕ(otgt )

in corresponding states, facilitating effective policy learning. This is also the assumption of most co-training methods [ 21 , 22 ]. Second, for states covered in Ssrc but not in Stgt , the encoder fϕ must produce embeddings fϕ(otgt ) for novel target observations that are consistent with the embeddings of their simulated counterparts fϕ(osrc ). This requires the learned representations to capture domain-invariant, task-relevant features, enabling policy to generalize to target (real-world) scenarios for which training data is only present in the source (simulated) domain .

# 4 Method 

To learn a generalizable policy πθ with robust feature fϕ from imbalanced sim-and-real datasets (|Dsrc | ≫ | Dtgt |), as outlined in Section 3, we propose a co-training framework that explicitly aligns the latent representation through Optimal Transport (OT). Our core strategy is to leverage action information to guide the alignment of learned visual latent features ( z = fϕ(o)). This alignment objective simultaneously encourages the encoder fϕ to discover domain-invariant representations while preserving detailed information for action prediction. Specifically, we propose a formulation based on OT to align joint observation-action distributions (Sec. 4.1). We further address the data imbalance problem through Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT) (Sec. 4.2) and a temporally-aware sampling strategy (Sec. 4.3), all integrated into a unified co-training framework (Sec. 4.4). 44.1 Optimal Transport for Action-Aware Feature Alignment 

While standard co-training methods [ 21 , 22 ] offer implicit feature alignment, and marginal distribution matching (e.g., Maximum Mean Discrepancy [ 18 ]) can overlook fine-grained correspondences, we seek a more structured approach. To learn domain-invariant visual features z = fϕ(o) that are also predictive of actions a ∈ A , we propose to align the joint distributions Psrc (fϕ(osrc ), a src ) and 

Ptgt (fϕ(otgt ), a tgt ) using Optimal Transport. This encourages the encoder fϕ to learn representations where the geometric relationships between (visual feature, action) pairs are preserved across domains. By minimizing an OT-based loss, the encoder fϕ is trained to shape the embedding space Z such that structures relevant to action prediction are consistent between simulation and the real world. Formally, given source samples {(oisrc , a isrc )}Nsrc  

> i=1

and target samples {(ojtgt , a jtgt )}Ntgt  

> j=1

, we aim to find an optimal transport plan Π∗ and an optimal encoder f ∗ 

> ϕ

that minimize the transportation cost between their joint distributions in the (z, a ) space. Based on the general OT formulation in Eq. 1, learning objective for the encoder fϕ, and implicitly the transport plan Π, can be expressed as finding 

fϕ that minimizes the Wasserstein distance between Psrc (fϕ(osrc ), a src ) and Ptgt (fϕ(otgt ), a tgt ):

min fϕ WC (Psrc (fϕ(osrc ), a src ), P tgt (fϕ(otgt ), a tgt )) . The ground cost c ideally combine distances in both the learned visual latent space Z and the action space A, for instance: 

Cϕ



(fϕ(oisrc ), a isrc ), (fϕ(ojtgt ), a jtgt )



= α1 · dZ (fϕ(oisrc ), f ϕ(ojtgt )) + α2 · dA(aisrc , a jtgt ). (2) Minimizing this objective using an iterative algorithm like Sinkhorn [ 49 ] creates a bi-level optimiza-tion. In the inner loop, for a fixed fϕ, an approximately optimal transport plan Π is computed. In the outer loop, fϕ is updated to reduce the cost incurred by this plan. This process effectively trains the encoder fϕ to produce embeddings z that make the source and target joint distributions (z, a )

less costly to align. A key advantage of OT is its ability to preserve geometric structures; by guiding alignment with action similarity (via dA), we shape the embedding function fϕ to cluster visual observations that lead to similar actions, irrespective of their domain of origin. 

Practical Implementation: Proprioception as Guidance. While direct alignment of (z, a ) is principled, discrepancies in controller characteristics or action representations between simulation and real-world teleoperation can make dA(asrc , a tgt ) an unreliable indicator of behavioral similarity. As a robust practical compromise, we leverage proprioceptive information x ∈ X (e.g., end-effector pose), which is more consistently represented across domains (Section 3.1) and highly correlated with robot behavior. Thus, our implemented ground cost c replaces actions a with proprioceptive states x, which is used in our UOT formulation (detailed in Section 4.2). 

4.2 Unbalanced Optimal Transport for Robust Alignment 

The standard OT formulation (Eq. 1) enforces strict marginal constraints, requiring all mass from the source distribution to be transported to the target and vice-versa. This is problematic in our sim-to-real setting primarily due to significant data imbalance ( |Dsrc | ≫ | Dtgt |) and the partial overlap between the state spaces covered by Dsrc and Dtgt (Section 3.1). Standard OT would either distort the latent space by forcing many-to-few mappings or create spurious alignments between non-corresponding states. To address these challenges, we employ Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT) [ 25 , 24 ]. UOT relaxes the hard marginal constraints of OT by introducing regularization terms that penalize deviations, thereby allowing for partial mass transport. This enables UOT to selectively align subsets of the distributions that are most similar according to the ground cost, while effectively down-weighting or ignoring the transport for dissimilar or unmatched portions. 

UOT Loss Formulation. Consider a mini-batch of Nbatch source samples {(oisrc , x isrc )}Nbatch  

> i=1

and 

Nbatch target samples {(ojtgt , x jtgt )}Nbatch  

> j=1

. Let their empirical distributions in the joint (fϕ(o), x )

space be ˆμsrc and ˆμtgt . Our UOT loss, LUOT (fϕ), is based on the Kantorovich formulation with entropic regularization and KL-divergence penalties for marginal relaxation: 

LUOT (fϕ) = min 

> Π∈RNbatch ×Nbatch
> +

⟨Π, ˆCϕ⟩F + ϵ · Ω(Π) + τ · KL (Π 1|| p) + τ · KL (Π ⊤1|| q). (3) Here, ˆCϕ is the Nbatch × Nbatch ground cost matrix, where each element ( ˆCϕ)ij is computed using the joint ground cost described in Sec. 4.1. The term Π is the transport plan; ϵ > 0 is the entropic regularization strength with Ω(Π) = P 

> i,j

Πij log Π ij being the entropy, facilitating efficient solution 5via algorithms like Sinkhorn-Knopp [ 49 ]; τ > 0 controls the penalty for deviating from the batch marginals p and q (typically uniform); and KL (·||· ) denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence. 

4.3 Temporally Aligned Sampling for Effective Mini-Batch Learning 

The efficacy of mini-batch OT, including UOT, hinges on presenting the solver with comparable source and target samples within each batch. For sequential robotic data, naive random sampling of individual transitions from Dsrc and Dtgt may yield pairs from different stages of tasks, leading to noisy transport plans and sub-optimal feature alignment by fϕ. Increasing the minibatch size may lead to higher likelihood of sampling aligned pairs but requires more computational resources. To address this, we introduce a temporally aligned sampling strategy designed to construct mini-batches with a higher density of meaningfully corresponding state-pairs. Our strategy leverages trajectory-level similarity as a heuristic. We first quantify similarity between source trajectories 

{ξksrc } ⊂ Dsrc and target trajectories {ξltgt } ⊂ Dtgt using Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [ 50 ]on their respective proprioceptive state sequences {xt}. The resulting normalized DTW distance, 

¯d(ξksrc , ξ ltgt ) = dDTW (ξksrc , ξ ltgt )/ max( |ξksrc |, |ξltgt |), reflects overall behavioral similarity. To turn these distances into sampling weights, we apply a softplus-based transformation: w(ξksrc , ξ ltgt ) = 1/(1 + e10 ·( ¯d(ξksrc ,ξ ltgt )−0.01) ). Mini-batch construction then proceeds by (1) sampling a pair of trajectories (ξsrc , ξ tgt ) with probability biased towards pairs exhibiting high similarity (i.e., low DTW distance) and (2) subsequently sampling individual transition tuples (osrc , x src , a src ) and 

(otgt , x tgt , a tgt ) from this selected, behaviorally similar trajectory pair. Fine-grained temporal alignment, such as sampling around DTW-matched time steps, can optionally be employed here. We describe how the UOT loss (Eq. 3) is adapted with this new sampling procedure in the appendix. This two-stage process significantly increases the likelihood that source and target samples within a mini-batch share similar proprioceptive states x. Consequently, the UOT optimization (Eq. 3) can more effectively focus on aligning the visual latent features fϕ(osrc ) and fϕ(otgt ) for these relevant state-pairs. We empirically verify the importance of this sampling strategy in appendix. 

4.4 Joint Co-Training Framework 

Putting all components together, our final approach is a joint co-training framework where the visual feature encoder fϕ and the policy πθ (a|z, x ) are optimized concurrently. The Unbalanced Optimal Transport loss ( LUOT ) serves as a regularization term, guiding fϕ to learn domain-invariant and action-relevant latent representations z = fϕ(o), while standard Behavior Cloning (BC) losses drive the policy learning. The overall training objective L(fϕ, π θ ) = LBC (fϕ, π θ ) + λ · LUOT (fϕ)

combines these components, where LBC represents the combined behavior cloning losses calculated over both source ( Dsrc ) and target ( Dtgt ) datasets using a standard imitation loss (e.g., MSE). The hyper-parameter λ > 0 balances feature alignment with policy imitation. The LUOT (fϕ) term is computed as defined in Equation 3, with mini-batches sampled with strategy described in Sec. 4.3. The overall training process is detailed in the appendix. 

# 5 Experiments 

We aim to validate the following core hypotheses. H1 : Our method effectively learns complex manipulation tasks in both simulation and the real world. H2 : Our method generalizes to target domains only seen in simulation. H3 : Our method is broadly applicable to multiple observation modalities. H4 : Scaling up simulation data coverage improves generalization performance. 

5.1 Experiment Setups 

To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we conduct comprehensive experiments in both sim-to-sim and sim-to-real transfer scenarios on a suite of robotic tabletop manipulation tasks: Lift ,

BoxInBin , Stack , Square , MugHang , and Drawer . These tasks are designed to test the system’s ability to handle key challenges in robotic manipulation, including dense object interactions, long-horizon reasoning, and high-precision control. 6Lift Drawer Stack BoxInBin MugHang Square Figure 3: Evaluation Task Suites. We evaluate our methods on 6 different tasks in the real world (top ) and simulation ( bottom ) to demonstrate the effectiveness of sim-to-real transfer. 

Environment setup. For the real-world experiments, we deploy our method on a Franka Emika Panda robotic arm, controlled at 20Hz using joint impedance control. Visual and point cloud observations are captured using an Intel RealSense D435 depth camera. Our simulation environments use the Robosuite [ 51 ] simulation framework. We calibrate the camera pose and camera intrinsics in simulation to match those obtained from the real-world setup to reduce the domain gap. 

Simulation data. For simulation experiments, we begin by collecting 10 human demonstrations per task. Using MimicGen [ 10 ], we synthesize 200-1000 trajectories in the source domain, covering the full range of initial states (denoted as Source ). In the target domain, we divide the reset region into two subregions: one is populated with 10 trajectories for training (denoted as Target ), while the other remains completely held out from training (denoted as Target-OOD ). This held-out subregion is used to evaluate each method’s generalization under Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) conditions. 

Real data. For real-world experiments, we adopt a similar strategy by partitioning the reset re-gion—aligned with the simulation setup into two subregions. Based on task complexity, we collect 10–25 human demonstrations within one subregion and generate 1000 simulated trajectories. To evaluate generalization in OOD scenarios, we consider the following settings in the real world: Shape ,where the test object has not been seen during real data collection; Reset , where the initial object pose falls outside the range covered by demonstrations; and Texture , where the object is wrapped in a novel texture not present in any real-world training data. Detailed visualizations of each task and reset configuration are included in the appendix. 

Observation modality and domain gaps. We evaluate our approach using two observation modal-ities: point clouds and RGB images. For point cloud observations, our method and the baselines adapt 3D Diffusion Policy [ 28 ] with a PointNet encoder [ 52 ]. For RGB image observations, we use Diffusion Policy [ 53 ] with a ResNet-18 encoder [ 54 ]. To evaluate the generalization capabilities of different methods under visual domain shifts in simulation, we introduce several target domain vari-ations: Viewpoint1-Point , Viewpoint3-Point , Perturbation-Point , Viewpoint-Image ,and Texture-Image . Descriptions of each domain shift are provided in the appendix. 

Baselines. We compare our method against the following baselines: MMD —minimizes the distance between the mean embeddings of source and target data [ 18 ]; Co-training —trains the model using a mixed batch of source and target domain data, following the strategy proposed by [ 21 , 22 ]; 

Source-only —trains the model exclusively on data from the source domain, which in sim-to-real experiments corresponds to using only simulation data; Target-only —trains the model exclusively on data from the target domain, which in sim-to-real experiments trains with only real world data. 

5.2 Cross-Domain Generalization Results                                                                                

> Stack (V) Square (V) BoxInBin (V) Stack (T) Square (T) BoxInBin (T) Average TT-O TT-O TT-O TT-O TT-O TT-O TT-O
> S.-only 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
> T.-only 0.30 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.82 0.00 0.42 0.00 0.48 0.00 0.64 0.00 0.48 0.00
> MMD 0.38 0.00 0.18 0.04 0.82 0.16 0.44 0.4 0.38 0.34 0.80 0.70 0.50 0.30
> Co-train. 0.44 0.04 0.76 0.00 0.90 0.14 0.54 0.34 0.66 0.46 0.98 0.72 0.71 0.28
> Ours 0.65 0.04 0.86 0.02 0.88 0.26 0.66 0.52 0.68 0.54 0.96 0.82 0.78 0.36

Table 1: Sim-to-Sim Success Rates for Image-Based Policies . V and T represent Viewpoint-Image 

and Texture-Image domain shifts, respectively. T and T-O correspond to the target domain and target domain with out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios. 7Stack (R) Square (R) BoxInBin (T) Average 

grasp full grasp full grasp full full 

Source-only 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.00 

Target-only 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.00 

Co-training 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.4 0.3 0.10 

Ours 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.1 0.7 0.7 0.40 

Table 2: Real-World Image-Based Policy OOD Success Rates. R and T denote Reset OOD and 

Texture OOD, respectively. The Average denotes the average full task success rates over all tasks.                                                                                          

> BoxInBin (V3) BoxInBin (P) Lift (V1) Stack (V1) Square (V1) MugHang (V1) Average
> TT-O TT-O TT-O TT-O TT-O TT-O TT-O
> S.-only 0.08 0.10 0.52 0.60 0.32 0.40 0.52 0.64 0.10 0.08 0.12 0.10 0.28 0.32
> T.-only 0.42 0.00 0.58 0.00 0.60 0.00 0.32 0.00 0.16 0.00 0.18 0.00 0.38 0.00
> MMD 0.50 0.38 0.66 0.50 0.56 0.52 0.70 0.66 0.18 0.12 0.18 0.20 0.46 0.40
> Co-train. 0.76 0.52 0.70 0.66 0.92 0.48 0.86 0.72 0.24 0.24 0.26 0.22 0.62 0.47
> Ours 0.84 0.58 0.80 0.76 0.80 0.60 0.82 0.86 0.42 0.38 0.40 0.34 0.68 0.59

Table 3: Sim-to-sim Success Rates For Point Cloud-Based Policies. V1 , V3 , and P indicate domain shifts due to Viewpoint1-Point , Viewpoint3-Point , and Perturbation-Point , respectively. 

T and T-O denote the target domain and target domain under out-of-distribution (OOD) conditions. We report results for policies using point cloud and image-based observations in both simulation and real-world settings. For simulation, image based and point cloud based performance are shown in Tables 1 and 3. For real-world experiments, in-distribution results are presented in Tables 7 and 8 in Appendix, while out-of-distribution (OOD) performance is reported in Tables 2 and 4. 

These results support the following key hypotheses: Our method effectively learns complex manipulation tasks in both simulation and the real world (H1). Experimental results show that our approach consistently matches or outperforms in terms of success rates all baselines across source and target domains in both simulated and real-world settings. On real-world tasks, our method achieves average success rates of 0.73 and 0.77 for image-based and point cloud-based policies, respectively. The Target-only baseline performs well in distribution but fails to generalize under domain shifts. The MMD baseline [ 18 ] offers limited improvement by aligning global feature statistics, but its coarse alignment often disrupts task-relevant structure and harms source-domain performance. In contrast, by using Unbalanced Optimal Transport, our method performs selective, structure-aware alignment, avoiding spurious matches. 

Our method generalizes to target domains only seen in simulation (H2). In Target-OOD sce-narios, our method outperforms all baselines, underscoring the value of learning domain-invariant representations (see Tab. 2 and Tab. 4). While Co-training baselines [ 21 , 22 ] perform well when the target-domain training data overlaps with the evaluation region, they struggle to generalize when this overlap is absent. This limitation is especially evident under large domain shifts. For example, in the real-world BoxInBin and Stack tasks with novel textures or reset poses, our method achieves success rates of 0.7 and 0.4, respectively, using image-based observations—compared to just 0.3 and 0.0 for the Co-training baseline. These results highlight the shortcomings of relying purely on supervised target-domain data without explicitly addressing domain shift. 

Our method is broadly applicable to multiple observation modalities (H3). We observe consistent performance gains across both image-based and point cloud inputs. In simulation, policies trained with either modality outperform all baselines, demonstrating that our approach effectively learns domain-invariant features that capture task-relevant information on multiple sensory modalities. 

Simulation data provides a scalable and effective way to augment real-world training. Across real-world tasks, both our method and the Co-training baseline benefit significantly from augment-ing limited real-world demonstrations with simulated data. Policies trained with this augmented data consistently outperform the Target-only baseline, especially in out-of-distribution (OOD) settings where real-world coverage is sparse. This underscores the value of using low-cost simulation data to fill in gaps in real-world datasets, enabling more scalable and generalizable behavior cloning. 

Scaling up simulation data coverage improves real-world performance (H4). To analyze sim-ulation data scaling, we consider the Stack task in the real world with point cloud observation. We generated 100, 300, 500, and 1000 simulated trajectories, combined them with 25 real-world 8Stack (R) Square (R) BoxInBin (R) Lift (R) Lift (S) Lift (R+S) Average                                                                 

> grasp full grasp full grasp full reach full reach full reach full full
> S.-only 0.6 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.2 0.8 0.8 0.6 0.6 0.9 0.9 0.48
> T.-only 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.17
> Co-train. 0.4 0.1 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.8 0.8 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.50
> Ours 0.8 0.4 0.6 0.1 0.7 0.5 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.67

Table 4: Real World Point-Cloud-Based Policy OOD Success Rates. R and S denote Reset OOD and Shape OOD, respectively. The Average denotes the average full task success rates over all tasks. demonstrations, and trained both our method and the Co-training baseline. As shown in Fig. 4(b), increasing the amount of simulation data significantly improves our method’s performance in target domain regions that lack real-world coverage, highlighting the importance of learning a domain-invariant latent space that enables the policy to generalize beyond observed distributions. 

Our method learns shared latent space that aligns simulation and real data. To better under-stand how the learned embeddings contribute to generalization, we visualize them using t-SNE [ 55 ], as shown in Fig. 4(a). Blue and red correspond to features extracted from source and target do-main observations, respectively. The left plot shows embeddings from the encoder trained with the Co-training baseline, while the right plot shows embeddings from our method. The visual-ization reveals that our approach leads to significantly better alignment between source and target distributions, highlighting its ability to learn domain-invariant representations that facilitate robust generalization. We also visualize the transport plan on a randomly sampled batch, along with the corresponding image observations from the source and target domains. As shown in Fig. 10 in the Appendix, the transport plan effectively aligns data points with similar states across domains. (a) t-SNE Visualization of Latent Space (b) OOD Success Rate Scaling 

Figure 4: (a) Latent Space Visualization. Our OT alignment maps source domain samples (blue) and target domain samples (red) nearby in the latent space, yielding a single, well - mixed cluster. This overlap demonstrates that OT alignment effectively synchronizes cross -domain feature distributions, improving sim-to-real transfer. (b) Out-Of-Distribution Performance. Scaling the number of simulation demonstrations leads to significant OOD success rate gains. 

# 6 Limitations and Conclusions 

The main limitation of our work is that we only address sim-to-real visual observation gaps. Ad-dressing action dynamics gaps remains future work. Because we use MimicGen [10] for automated simulation demonstration generation, we inherit its limitations, namely, our method primarily applies to tasks with prehensile and quasi-static interactions. We require a small number of real-world on-task demonstrations that are aligned with the simulated demonstrations. Future work involves relaxing this requirement, for example, by instead consuming unstructured real-world data, such as play data. In conclusion, we presented a framework for effectively incorporating large datasets of simulation demonstrations into real-world policy learning pipelines via feature-consistent co-training. We pro-posed using Optimal Transport (OT) to align encoder features to be invariant to whether observations are from simulation or the real world, improving the transferability of simulation data. Because we have much more simulation data than real-world data, we incorporated an Unbalanced OT loss within our training objective and devised a data sampling scheme that explicitly yields similar simulation and real-world demonstration pairs. Finally, we demonstrated the improved learning performance arising from the simulated demonstrations both in a sim-to-sim testbed as well as in real-world tasks. 97 Acknowledgment 

This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Awards No. 2409016 and 2442393. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. 10 References 

[1] Dean A Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. Advances in neural information processing systems , 1, 1988. [2] Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni, Li Fei-Fei, Silvio Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Martín-Martín. What matters in learning from offline human demonstrations for robot manipulation. In 5th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2021. [3] Pete Florence, Corey Lynch, Andy Zeng, Oscar A Ramirez, Ayzaan Wahid, Laura Downs, Adrian Wong, Johnny Lee, Igor Mordatch, and Jonathan Tompson. Implicit behavioral cloning. In Conference on robot learning , pages 158–168. PMLR, 2022. [4] Alexander Khazatsky, Karl Pertsch, Suraj Nair, Ashwin Balakrishna, Sudeep Dasari, Siddharth Karamcheti, Soroush Nasiriany, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Kirsty Ellis, Peter David Fagan, Joey Hejna, Masha Itkina, Marion Lepert, Yecheng Jason Ma, Patrick Tree Miller, Jimmy Wu, Suneel Belkhale, Shivin Dass, Huy Ha, Arhan Jain, Abraham Lee, Young-woon Lee, Marius Memmel, Sungjae Park, Ilija Radosavovic, Kaiyuan Wang, Albert Zhan, Kevin Black, Cheng Chi, Kyle Beltran Hatch, Shan Lin, Jingpei Lu, Jean Mercat, Abdul Rehman, Pannag R Sanketi, Archit Sharma, Cody Simpson, Quan Vuong, Homer Rich Walke, Blake Wulfe, Ted Xiao, Jonathan Heewon Yang, Arefeh Yavary, Tony Z. Zhao, Christopher Agia, Rohan Baijal, Mateo Guaman Castro, Daphne Chen, Qiuyu Chen, Trinity Chung, Jaimyn Drake, Ethan Paul Foster, Jensen Gao, David Antonio Herrera, Minho Heo, Kyle Hsu, Jiaheng Hu, Donovon Jackson, Charlotte Le, Yunshuang Li, Kevin Lin, Roy Lin, Zehan Ma, Abhiram Maddukuri, Suvir Mirchandani, Daniel Morton, Tony Nguyen, Abigail O’Neill, Rosario Scalise, Derick Seale, Victor Son, Stephen Tian, Emi Tran, Andrew E. Wang, Yilin Wu, Annie Xie, Jingyun Yang, Patrick Yin, Yunchu Zhang, Osbert Bastani, Glen Berseth, Jeannette Bohg, Ken Goldberg, Abhinav Gupta, Abhishek Gupta, Dinesh Jayaraman, Joseph J Lim, Jitendra Malik, Roberto Martín-Martín, Subramanian Ramamoorthy, Dorsa Sadigh, Shuran Song, Jiajun Wu, Michael C. Yip, Yuke Zhu, Thomas Kollar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Droid: A large-scale in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset. 2024. [5] Open X-Embodiment Collaboration, Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhinav Gupta, Abhi-ram Maddukuri, Abhishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Mandlekar, Ajinkya Jain, Albert Tung, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anchit Gupta, Andrew Wang, Andrey Kolobov, Anikait Singh, Animesh Garg, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Annie Xie, Anthony Brohan, Antonin Raffin, Archit Sharma, Arefeh Yavary, Arhan Jain, Ashwin Balakrishna, Ayzaan Wahid, Ben Burgess-Limerick, Beomjoon Kim, Bernhard Schölkopf, Blake Wulfe, Brian Ichter, Cewu Lu, Charles Xu, Charlotte Le, Chelsea Finn, Chen Wang, Chenfeng Xu, Cheng Chi, Chenguang Huang, Christine Chan, Christopher Agia, Chuer Pan, Chuyuan Fu, Coline Devin, Danfei Xu, Daniel Morton, Danny Driess, Daphne Chen, Deepak Pathak, Dhruv Shah, Dieter Büchler, Dinesh Jayaraman, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Dorsa Sadigh, Edward Johns, Ethan Foster, Fangchen Liu, Federico Ceola, Fei Xia, Feiyu Zhao, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Freek Stulp, Gaoyue Zhou, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, Gautam Salhotra, Ge Yan, Gilbert Feng, Giulio Schiavi, Glen Berseth, Gregory Kahn, Guangwen Yang, Guanzhi Wang, Hao Su, Hao-Shu Fang, Haochen Shi, Henghui Bao, Heni Ben Amor, Henrik I Christensen, Hiroki Furuta, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Homer Walke, Hongjie Fang, Huy Ha, Igor Mordatch, Ilija Radosavovic, Isabel Leal, Jacky Liang, Jad Abou-Chakra, Jaehyung Kim, Jaimyn Drake, Jan Peters, Jan Schneider, Jasmine Hsu, Jay Vakil, Jeannette Bohg, Jeffrey Bingham, Jeffrey Wu, Jensen Gao, Jiaheng Hu, Jiajun Wu, Jialin Wu, Jiankai Sun, Jianlan Luo, Jiayuan Gu, Jie Tan, Jihoon Oh, Jimmy Wu, Jingpei Lu, Jingyun Yang, Jitendra Malik, João Silvério, Joey Hejna, Jonathan Booher, Jonathan Tompson, Jonathan Yang, Jordi Salvador, Joseph J. Lim, Junhyek Han, Kaiyuan Wang, Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Karol Hausman, Keegan Go, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Ken Goldberg, Kendra Byrne, Kenneth Oslund, Kento Kawaharazuka, Kevin Black, Kevin Lin, Kevin Zhang, Kiana Ehsani, Kiran Lekkala, Kirsty Ellis, Krishan Rana, Krishnan Srinivasan, Kuan Fang, Kunal Pratap Singh, Kuo-Hao Zeng, Kyle Hatch, Kyle Hsu, Laurent Itti, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Lerrel Pinto, Li Fei-Fei, Liam Tan, Linxi "Jim" Fan, Lionel Ott, Lisa Lee, Luca Weihs, Magnum Chen, Marion Lepert, Marius Memmel, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Masha Itkina, Mateo Guaman Castro, Max Spero, Maximilian Du, Michael Ahn, Michael C. Yip, Mingtong Zhang, Mingyu Ding, 11 Minho Heo, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Mohit Sharma, Moo Jin Kim, Naoaki Kanazawa, Nicklas Hansen, Nicolas Heess, Nikhil J Joshi, Niko Suenderhauf, Ning Liu, Norman Di Palo, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, Oier Mees, Oliver Kroemer, Osbert Bastani, Pannag R Sanketi, Patrick "Tree" Miller, Patrick Yin, Paul Wohlhart, Peng Xu, Peter David Fagan, Peter Mitrano, Pierre Sermanet, Pieter Abbeel, Priya Sundaresan, Qiuyu Chen, Quan Vuong, Rafael Rafailov, Ran Tian, Ria Doshi, Roberto Mart’in-Mart’in, Rohan Baijal, Rosario Scalise, Rose Hendrix, Roy Lin, Runjia Qian, Ruohan Zhang, Russell Mendonca, Rutav Shah, Ryan Hoque, Ryan Julian, Samuel Bustamante, Sean Kirmani, Sergey Levine, Shan Lin, Sherry Moore, Shikhar Bahl, Shivin Dass, Shubham Sonawani, Shubham Tulsiani, Shuran Song, Sichun Xu, Siddhant Haldar, Siddharth Karamcheti, Simeon Adebola, Simon Guist, Soroush Nasiriany, Stefan Schaal, Stefan Welker, Stephen Tian, Subramanian Ramamoorthy, Sudeep Dasari, Suneel Belkhale, Sungjae Park, Suraj Nair, Suvir Mirchandani, Takayuki Osa, Tanmay Gupta, Tatsuya Harada, Tatsuya Matsushima, Ted Xiao, Thomas Kollar, Tianhe Yu, Tianli Ding, Todor Davchev, Tony Z. Zhao, Travis Armstrong, Trevor Darrell, Trinity Chung, Vidhi Jain, Vikash Kumar, Vincent Vanhoucke, Wei Zhan, Wenxuan Zhou, Wolfram Burgard, Xi Chen, Xiangyu Chen, Xiaolong Wang, Xinghao Zhu, Xinyang Geng, Xiyuan Liu, Xu Liangwei, Xuanlin Li, Yansong Pang, Yao Lu, Yecheng Jason Ma, Yejin Kim, Yevgen Chebotar, Yifan Zhou, Yifeng Zhu, Yilin Wu, Ying Xu, Yixuan Wang, Yonatan Bisk, Yongqiang Dou, Yoonyoung Cho, Youngwoon Lee, Yuchen Cui, Yue Cao, Yueh-Hua Wu, Yujin Tang, Yuke Zhu, Yunchu Zhang, Yunfan Jiang, Yunshuang Li, Yunzhu Li, Yusuke Iwasawa, Yutaka Matsuo, Zehan Ma, Zhuo Xu, Zichen Jeff Cui, Zichen Zhang, Zipeng Fu, and Zipeng Lin. Open X-Embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and RT-X models. https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864 , 2023. [6] Genesis Authors. Genesis: A universal and generative physics engine for robotics and beyond, December 2024. [7] Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, Li Yi, Angel X. Chang, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Hao Su. SAPIEN: A simulated part-based interactive environment. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2020. [8] Alexander Raistrick, Lingjie Mei, Karhan Kayan, David Yan, Yiming Zuo, Beining Han, Hongyu Wen, Meenal Parakh, Stamatis Alexandropoulos, Lahav Lipson, et al. Infinigen indoors: Photorealistic indoor scenes using procedural generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 21783–21794, 2024. [9] Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca Weihs, Kiana Ehsani, Jordi Salvador, Winson Han, Eric Kolve, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Procthor: Large-scale embodied ai using procedural generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,35:5982–5994, 2022. [10] Ajay Mandlekar, Soroush Nasiriany, Bowen Wen, Iretiayo Akinola, Yashraj Narang, Linxi Fan, Yuke Zhu, and Dieter Fox. Mimicgen: A data generation system for scalable robot learning using human demonstrations. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2023. [11] Shuo Cheng, Caelan Garrett, Ajay Mandlekar, and Danfei Xu. Nod-tamp: Multi-step manipula-tion planning with neural object descriptors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01530 , 2023. [12] OpenAI: Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob Mc-Grew, Jakub Pachocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Alex Ray, et al. Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 39(1):3–20, 2020. [13] Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS) , pages 23–30. IEEE, 2017. [14] Nicklas Hansen, Rishabh Jangir, Yu Sun, Guillem Alenyà, Pieter Abbeel, Alexei A Efros, Lerrel Pinto, and Xiaolong Wang. Self-supervised policy adaptation during deployment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.04309 , 2020. 12 [15] Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Mastering visual continuous control: Improved data-augmented reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.09645 ,2021. [16] Konstantinos Bousmalis, Nathan Silberman, David Dohan, Dumitru Erhan, and Dilip Krishnan. Unsupervised pixel-level domain adaptation with generative adversarial networks. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 3722–3731, 2017. [17] Stephen James, Paul Wohlhart, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Julian Ibarz, Sergey Levine, Raia Hadsell, and Konstantinos Bousmalis. Sim-to-real via sim-to-sim: Data-efficient robotic grasping via randomized-to-canonical adaptation networks. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 12627–12637, 2019. [18] Eric Tzeng, Judy Hoffman, Ning Zhang, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. Deep domain confusion: Maximizing for domain invariance. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3474 , 2014. [19] Mingsheng Long, Yue Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael Jordan. Learning transferable features with deep adaptation networks. In International conference on machine learning , pages 97–105. PMLR, 2015. [20] Han Zhao, Remi Tachet Des Combes, Kun Zhang, and Geoffrey Gordon. On learning invariant representations for domain adaptation. In International conference on machine learning , pages 7523–7532. PMLR, 2019. [21] Adam Wei, Abhinav Agarwal, Boyuan Chen, Rohan Bosworth, Nicholas Pfaff, and Russ Tedrake. Empirical analysis of sim-and-real cotraining of diffusion policies for planar pushing from pixels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.22634 , 2025. [22] Abhiram Maddukuri, Zhenyu Jiang, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Soroush Nasiriany, Yuqi Xie, Yu Fang, Wenqi Huang, Zu Wang, Zhenjia Xu, Nikita Chernyadev, et al. Sim-and-real co-training: A simple recipe for vision-based robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.24361 , 2025. [23] Nicolas Courty, Rémi Flamary, Devis Tuia, and Alain Rakotomamonjy. Optimal transport for domain adaptation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 39(9):1853– 1865, 2016. [24] Kilian Fatras, Thibault Séjourné, Rémi Flamary, and Nicolas Courty. Unbalanced minibatch optimal transport; applications to domain adaptation. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 3186–3197. PMLR, 2021. [25] Lenaic Chizat, Gabriel Peyré, Bernhard Schmitzer, and François-Xavier Vialard. Scaling algo-rithms for unbalanced optimal transport problems. Mathematics of computation , 87(314):2563– 2609, 2018. [26] Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705 , 2023. [27] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. 

The International Journal of Robotics Research , page 02783649241273668, 2023. [28] Yanjie Ze, Gu Zhang, Kangning Zhang, Chenyuan Hu, Muhan Wang, and Huazhe Xu. 3d diffusion policy: Generalizable visuomotor policy learning via simple 3d representations. In 

Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2024. [29] Philipp Wu, Yide Shentu, Zhongke Yi, Xingyu Lin, and Pieter Abbeel. Gello: A general, low-cost, and intuitive teleoperation framework for robot manipulators. In 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 12156–12163. IEEE, 2024. 13 [30] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Chuer Pan, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, Siyuan Feng, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Universal manipulation interface: In-the-wild robot teaching without in-the-wild robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10329 , 2024. [31] Simar Kareer, Dhruv Patel, Ryan Punamiya, Pranay Mathur, Shuo Cheng, Chen Wang, Judy Hoffman, and Danfei Xu. Egomimic: Scaling imitation learning via egocentric video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24221 , 2024. [32] Zhenyu Jiang, Yuqi Xie, Kevin Lin, Zhenjia Xu, Weikang Wan, Ajay Mandlekar, Linxi Fan, and Yuke Zhu. Dexmimicgen: Automated data generation for bimanual dexterous manipulation via imitation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24185 , 2024. [33] Shuo Cheng, Caelan Reed Garrett, Ajay Mandlekar, and Danfei Xu. NOD-TAMP: Generalizable long-horizon planning with neural object descriptors. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2024. [34] Stephen James, Andrew J Davison, and Edward Johns. Transferring end-to-end visuomotor control from simulation to real world for a multi-stage task. In Conference on Robot Learning ,pages 334–343. PMLR, 2017. [35] Zhecheng Yuan, Tianming Wei, Shuiqi Cheng, Gu Zhang, Yuanpei Chen, and Huazhe Xu. Learning to manipulate anywhere: A visual generalizable framework for reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15815 , 2024. [36] Abolfazl Farahani, Sahar Voghoei, Khaled Rasheed, and Hamid R Arabnia. A brief review of domain adaptation. Advances in data science and information engineering: proceedings from ICDATA 2020 and IKE 2020 , pages 877–894, 2021. [37] Prithwish Dan, Kushal Kedia, Angela Chao, Edward Weiyi Duan, Maximus Adrian Pace, Wei-Chiu Ma, and Sanjiban Choudhury. X-sim: Cross-embodiment learning via real-to-sim-to-real. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.07096 , 2025. [38] Daniel Ho, Kanishka Rao, Zhuo Xu, Eric Jang, Mohi Khansari, and Yunfei Bai. Retinagan: An object-aware approach to sim-to-real transfer. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 10920–10926. IEEE, 2021. [39] Dripta S Raychaudhuri, Sujoy Paul, Jeroen Vanbaar, and Amit K Roy-Chowdhury. Cross-domain imitation from observations. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8902–8912. PMLR, 2021. [40] Kuno Kim, Yihong Gu, Jiaming Song, Shengjia Zhao, and Stefano Ermon. Domain adaptive imitation learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 5286–5295. PMLR, 2020. [41] Nicolas Courty, Rémi Flamary, and Devis Tuia. Domain adaptation with regularized optimal transport. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2014, Nancy, France, September 15-19, 2014. Proceedings, Part I 14 , pages 274–289. Springer, 2014. [42] Michaël Perrot, Nicolas Courty, Rémi Flamary, and Amaury Habrard. Mapping estimation for discrete optimal transport. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 29, 2016. [43] Ievgen Redko, Amaury Habrard, and Marc Sebban. Theoretical analysis of domain adaptation with optimal transport. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2017, Skopje, Macedonia, September 18–22, 2017, Proceedings, Part II 10 , pages 737–753. Springer, 2017. [44] Nicolas Courty, Rémi Flamary, Amaury Habrard, and Alain Rakotomamonjy. Joint distribution optimal transportation for domain adaptation. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [45] Duy MH Nguyen, An T Le, Trung Q Nguyen, Nghiem T Diep, Tai Nguyen, Duy Duong-Tran, Jan Peters, Li Shen, Mathias Niepert, and Daniel Sonntag. Dude: Dual distribution-aware context prompt learning for large vision-language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04489 ,2024. 14 [46] Kushal Kedia, Prithwish Dan, Angela Chao, Maximus A Pace, and Sanjiban Choudhury. One-shot imitation under mismatched execution. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 15649–15656. IEEE, 2025. [47] Bharath Bhushan Damodaran, Benjamin Kellenberger, Rémi Flamary, Devis Tuia, and Nicolas Courty. Deepjdot: Deep joint distribution optimal transport for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 447–463, 2018. [48] Jan Matas, Stephen James, and Andrew J Davison. Sim-to-real reinforcement learning for deformable object manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 734–743. PMLR, 2018. [49] Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. Advances in neural information processing systems , 26, 2013. [50] Omer Gold and Micha Sharir. Dynamic time warping and geometric edit distance: Breaking the quadratic barrier. ACM Transactions On Algorithms (TALG) , 14(4):1–17, 2018. [51] Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, Roberto Martín-Martín, Abhishek Joshi, Soroush Nasiriany, and Yifeng Zhu. robosuite: A modular simulation framework and benchmark for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12293 , 2020. [52] Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 652–660, 2017. [53] Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. [54] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 770–778, 2016. [55] Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine learning research , 9(11), 2008. [56] Neville Hogan. Impedance control: An approach to manipulation: Part ii—implementation. 1985. [57] Roger Y Tsai, Reimar K Lenz, et al. A new technique for fully autonomous and efficient 3 d robotics hand/eye calibration. IEEE Transactions on robotics and automation , 5(3):345–358, 1989. [58] Meng Han, Liang Wang, Limin Xiao, Hao Zhang, Chenhao Zhang, Xiangrong Xu, and Jianfeng Zhu. Quickfps: Architecture and algorithm co-design for farthest point sampling in large-scale point clouds. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems ,2023. 15 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The paper clearly states the claims made and contributions in the introduction and abstract. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The limitation of our method is discussed in the conclusion section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [NA] 16 Justification: Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The complete implementation detail is included in the Appendix Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? 17 Answer: [Yes] Justification: The code and data are available on our project webpage. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We include full detail in Appendix Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [No] Justification: The main result of our paper requires substantial effort to execute each real world evaluation trial. Therefore, producing error bars is impractical. We provide detailed description on the evaluation conditions of our experiment. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). 18 • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide full detail on computation resource required for our experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: Our experiment does not involve formal human study. Demonstration data is collected by authors with explicit consent. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [NA] Justification: Our work is largely an algorithm for improving robot performance with simulation data. We do not expect immediate and direct societal impact of our work. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. 19 • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Our work is built on existing open source codebases, which we provide adequate citation and credit. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. 20 • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not release new assets. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

21 Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [NA] Justification: Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 22 A Table of Contents 

The supplementary material has the following contents: • Task and Hardware Setups (Sec. B): Detailed descriptions of the hardware setups, dataset, and task settings. • Model and Training Details (Sec. C): Descriptions of the neural network architectures used in our experiments and the corresponding training procedures. • Ablation Study on Sampling Strategy (Sec. D): Evaluation and analysis of different sampling strategies. • Additional Results (Sec. F): In-distribution evaluation results for both image-based and point cloud-based policies in the real world. • Transport Plan Visualization (Sec. H): Visualizations of the optimal transport plan for randomly sampled training batches. • Visualization of Latent Space (Sec. I): Visual comparisons of the learned latent spaces between our method and the Co-training baseline across additional tasks. More video results and analysis can be found on our website: https://ot-sim2real.github.io/ 

# B Task and Hardware Setups 

To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we conduct comprehensive experiments on a suite of robotic tabletop manipulation tasks, covering both sim-to-sim and sim-to-real transfer scenarios. These tasks are designed to test the system’s ability to handle key challenges in robotic manipulation, including dense object interactions, long-horizon reasoning, and high-precision control: • Lift : Grasp the rim of a mug and lift it vertically; • BoxInBin : Grasp a tall box and place it into a bin; • Stack : Grasp a small cube and stack it on top of a longer cuboid; • Square : Grasp the handle of a square-shaped object and insert it onto a peg; • MugHang : Grasp the rim of a mug and hang it on a mug tree using the handle; • Drawer : Open a drawer, grasp a coffee pod from the table, place it into the drawer, and close the drawer. 

B.1 Hardware Setups 

The system setup is illustrated in Fig. 5. We use a Franka Emika Panda robot controlled via a joint impedance controller [ 56 ] running at 20 Hz for policy execution. For data collection, the robot is teleoperated using a Meta Quest 3 headset, with tracked Cartesian poses converted to joint configurations through inverse kinematics. RGB image and depth are captured using an Intel RealSense D435 depth camera. 

B.2 Domain Shifts and Observation Gaps 

We assess generalization under visual domain shifts in simulation through designing the following target domain shifts: • Viewpoint1-Point : The camera is rotated approximately 30 ◦ around the z-axis, resulting in a side view in the target domain compared to a front-facing view in the source. Point cloud observations are used. • Viewpoint3-Point : The camera is rotated approximately 90 ◦ around the z-axis, introduc-ing a more extreme viewpoint shift. Point cloud observations are used. • Perturbation-Point : Random noise sampled uniformly from the range [−0.01 , 0.01] is added to each point in the point cloud to simulate sensor noise or domain shift. 23 RealSense  

> D435
> Franka
> Robot
> Meta
> Quest 3

Figure 5: Hardware Setup. Our hardware platform uses a Franka Emika Panda robot, with an Intel RealSense D435 camera for capturing image and depth, and a Meta Quest 3 headset for teleoperation. Stack       

> Source (Image)
> Stack
> Viewpoint1 -Image
> Stack
> Texture -Image
> Stack
> Real (Image)
> BoxInBin
> Source (Point Cloud)
> BoxInBin
> Viewpoint3 -Point
> BoxInBin
> Perturbation -Point
> BoxInBin
> Real (Point cloud)

Figure 6: Observation Gap Across Domains. Top: image observations for the Stack task from source, Viewpoint1-Image , Texture-Image , and real-world domains. Bottom: point cloud ob-servations for the BoxInBin task from source, Viewpoint3-Point , Perturbation-Point , and real-world domains. Point cloud color is for visualization only and not used as input to the policy. • Viewpoint1-Image : A 20 ◦ camera rotation around the z-axis is applied. RGB image observations are used. • Texture-Image : The table texture in the target domain is modified. RGB image observa-tions are used. We illustrate the observation gap across all domains in Fig. 6. The first row displays image obser-vations for the Stack task from the source domain, Viewpoint1-Image , Texture-Image , and the real world. The second row shows point cloud observations for the BoxInBin task from the source domain, Viewpoint3-Point , Perturbation-Point , and the real world. Point cloud color is for visualization only and not used as input to the policy. 

B.3 Task Datasets, Reset Ranges, and OOD Variants 

We focus primarily on evaluating policy performance in regions covered exclusively by source-domain demonstrations. To conduct controlled experiments, we define three distinct reset regions for each task— Source , Target , and Target-OOD —as shown in Fig. 7. Specifically: 24 Lift Stack BoxInBin MugHang Square Drawer Number of real demos 10 25 20 15 25 25 Table 5: Number of Real-World Demonstrations. We collect 10–25 demonstrations per task, varying with task difficulty. Source Domain          

> Target Domain (Sim,
> Texture -Image as
> an example)
> Target Domain ( Real)
> No sim -to -sim
> experiments
> Source reset range
> (dense demos)
> Target domain In-Distribution
> (Target )reset range
> (sparse demos)
> Target domain Out -Of -Distribution
> (Target -OOD )reset range
> (no demos)

Figure 7: Reset Ranges for Each Task. The first row illustrates the Source region, where dense source-domain demonstrations are collected. The second row shows the Target and Target-OOD 

reset ranges used in sim-to-sim transfer experiments. In this setting, the Target region is sparsely covered by demonstrations, while the Target-OOD region contains no demonstrations and is used exclusively for policy evaluation. The third row similarly presents the Target and Target-OOD 

regions for sim-to-real transfer experiments. • Source : A large region that is densely covered by demonstrations in the source domain. We generate 1000 demonstrations using MimicGen [10] within the Source region. • Target : A small subset of the Source region. This region is sparsely covered by demon-strations in the target domain, and is therefore considered in-distribution during evaluation. For sim-to-sim transfer, we collect 10 demonstrations within this region. For sim-to-real transfer, the number of real-world demonstrations collected in the Target region is adjusted based on task difficulty, as detailed in Tab. 5. • Target-OOD : No demonstrations are collected in the Target-OOD region, which is used solely for evaluation and treated as out-of-distribution (OOD). For sim-to-real transfer experiments, in addition to the reset range OOD (denoted as Reset ), we consider two additional OOD variants. In the Texture variant, the object’s texture is modified to one that is unseen in the real-world demonstrations. In the Shape variant, the object is replaced with a novel shape not encountered in the real-world demonstrations. These variants are illustrated in Fig. 8. Texture OOD  Shape OOD  Reset + Shape OOD    

> Target reset range Target -OOD reset range

Figure 8: Texture and Shape OOD in Sim-to-Real Experiments. Visualization of reset ranges for the BoxInBin task under Texture OOD, and the Lift task under both Shape OOD and 

Shape+Reset OOD conditions. 25 C Model and Training Details 

For point cloud-based experiments, we adopt the 3D Diffusion Policy architecture [ 28 ] with a PointNet encoder [ 52 ]. The diffusion head receives features extracted from the point cloud observations along with robot proprioceptive inputs (joint and gripper positions), and outputs 7-DOF target joint positions and the gripper action. We project the depth map into the robot base frame to generate the scene point cloud. For a pixel with coordinate (u, v ) and depth d, the corresponding 3D location can be recovered by: 

pw = R · K−1 · I + t

where I = ( u · d, v · d, d ), [R | t] denotes the camera pose obtained through hand-eye calibration [ 57 ], and K denotes the camera intrinsic matrix. We crop the reconstructed scene point cloud using a bounding box defined by x ∈ [−0.2, 0.1] , y ∈ [−0.2, 0.2] , and z ∈ [0 .008 , 0.588] to exclude irrelevant background information. The cropped point cloud is then downsampled to 2048 points using Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) [58]. For experiments with image-based policy, we adopt Diffusion Policy [ 27 ] with a ResNet-based [ 54 ]visual encoder. The original images are captured by the camera at a resolution of 480 × 640 . During preprocessing, the images are downsampled to 120 × 160 , followed by random cropping to 108 × 144 

during training and center cropping during testing. The policy takes stacked history images and robot proprioceptive inputs (joint and gripper positions) as input, and outputs 7-DOF target joint positions along with the gripper action. Our overall training procedure is summarized in Algm. 1. We use a batch size of 256 for the behavior cloning loss LBC , with a co-training ratio of 0.9 following Maddukuri et al. [ 22 ]. For the optimal transport loss LOT , the batch size is set to 128, with a weighting coefficient λ = 0 .1. We use 

ϵ = 0 .0005 and τ = 0 .01 in our experiments. 

Algorithm 1 Joint Policy Training with OT 

Require: Source dataset Dsrc , Target dataset Dtgt  

> 1:

Initialize encoder fϕ, and policy πθ 

> 2:

Compute DTW distances for all trajectories pairs in Dsrc and Dtgt  

> 3:

for iteration t = 1 to T do  

> 4:

Sample a paired batch {(oisrc , x isrc , a isrc , o jtgt , x jtgt , a jtgt )} with size N from Dsrc and Dtgt 

using strategy described in Sec. 4.3  

> 5:

Compute features {zisrc } and {zjtgt } using encoder fϕ 

> 6:

Construct ground cost matrix ˆCϕ as described in Sec. 4.1  

> 7:

Compute optimal transport plan Π∗ = arg min Π∈RN ×N

> +

(⟨Π, ˆCϕ⟩F + ϵ · Ω(Π) + τ ·

KL (Π 1|| p) + τ · KL (Π ⊤1|| q)) via Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm [49]  

> 8:

Compute OT loss LUOT (fϕ) = ⟨Π∗, ˆCϕ⟩F 

> 9:

Sample {(oisrc , x isrc , a isrc )} from Dsrc and sample {(ojtgt , x jtgt , a jtgt )} from Dtgt  

> 10:

Compute BC loss LBC (fϕ, π θ ) 

> 11:

Update fϕ and πθ with gradients of LBC (fϕ, π θ ) + λ · LUOT (fϕ) 

> 12:

end for 

# D Ablation Study on Sampling Strategy 

To assess the effectiveness of our sampling strategy, we compare the full method against a variant (denoted as Ours w/o Sampler ) that does not apply any trajectory-level sampling. In this baseline, source and target data are randomly sampled across trajectories and time steps, with no coordination. We also include an oracle variant (denoted as UOT-Oracle ), which constructs perfectly paired batches—each state is observed in both the source and target domains to ensure that batch data originates from the same underlying states. We evaluate policy performance on the Stack task under the Viewpoint1-Point variation, with results shown in Fig. 9. 26 Source Target Target-OOD       

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> Success Rate
> 0.96
> 0.52
> 0.64
> 0.94 0.92
> 0.50
> 0.97
> 0.82 0.86
> 0.96 1.00
> 0.92
> Performance Comparison Across Domains
> Source-only Ours w/o Sampler Ours UOT - Oracle Paired

Figure 9: Sampling Strategies Comparison. Our proposed sampling strategy ( Ours ) improves policy success rates on the Stack task with Viewpoint1-Point , outperforming Ours w/o Sampler , and achieving performance comparable to the oracle-paired upper bound ( UOT-Oracle ). 

Temporal-aware strategy improves pairing quality and downstream performance. The oracle baseline demonstrates that, given perfectly aligned data, unbalanced OT loss significantly enhances generalization by enabling the encoder to learn domain-invariant representations. In contrast, the no-sampling variant ( Ours w/o Sampler ) exhibits poor generalization in the Target-OOD setting. This degradation likely stems from the low probability of encountering aligned state pairs in mini-batches—especially problematic in long-horizon tasks, where uncoordinated sampling rarely produces temporally aligned data. 

# E Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis 

We conduct an ablation study to evaluate the sensitivity of our method to key hyperparameters, including the entropy regularization coefficient ( ϵ), the KL divergence penalty term ( τ ), and the window size used in temporally aligned sampling. In each experiment, we vary a single hyperpa-rameter while keeping the others fixed, train the policy, and assess its performance via rollouts. We report results for the BoxInBin task under the Viewpoint-Image setting and the Lift task under the Texture-Image setting, as shown in Table 6. The results indicate that our method is robust to hyperparameter variations within reasonable ranges. Specifically, performance remains stable when ϵ and τ are set between 0.001 and 0.1, and when the window size is varied between 5 and 20. Our method consistently outperforms the co-training baseline in OOD scenarios, where the baseline achieves a success rate of 0.14 on BoxInBin and 0.6 on Lift . These findings suggest that, although our approach introduces additional components, it does not require extensive tuning and offers clear advantages in terms of generalization. 

# F Additional Real-world Evaluation Results 

We conduct extensive real-world evaluations to validate the effectiveness of our approach. Sim-to-real transfer results for in-distribution scenarios are reported in Tab.7 and Tab.8 for image-based and point cloud-based policies, respectively. Results for out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios are presented in the main paper. Experimental results show that our approach consistently outperforms all baselines in real-world in-distribution settings. Our method achieves average success rates of 0.73 and 0.77 for image-based and point cloud-based policies, respectively, demonstrating its effectiveness in learning complex real-world manipulation tasks. 

# G Performance with Scarce Target Domain Data 

To assess the effectiveness of our method under limited target domain data, we compare it against several baselines in the low-data regime for the BoxInBin task with the Viewpoint3-Point setting. 27 ϵ                                                                                                        

> 0.0001 0.001 0.005 0.01 0.04 1T0.90 0.94 0.92 0.88 0.90 0.88 T-O 0.18 0.16 0.26 0.22 0.18 0.20
> τ
> 0.0001 0.001 0.005 0.02 0.04 1T0.88 0.96 0.94 0.94 0.92 0.94 T-O 0.28 0.26 0.20 0.28 0.22 0.22 winsize 1510 20 40 120 T0.82 0.92 0.86 0.90 0.94 0.84 T-O 0.20 0.22 0.22 0.24 0.16 0.14
> (a) BoxInBin
> ϵ
> 0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.04 0.1 1T0.84 0.88 0.80 0.76 0.78 0.76 T-O 0.60 0.74 0.62 0.66 0.68 0.54
> τ
> 0.0001 0.005 0.02 0.04 0.1 1T0.78 0.70 0.76 0.76 0.78 0.74 T-O 0.56 0.67 0.64 0.66 0.62 0.66 winsize 1510 20 40 120 T0.86 0.80 0.70 0.78 0.74 0.82 T-O 0.66 0.60 0.67 0.58 0.56 0.60
> (b) Lift

Table 6: Hyperparameter Sensitivity . In each series of experiments, we vary a single hyperparameter while keeping the others fixed, train the policy, and assess its success rates via rollouts. T and T-O denote the target domain and the target domain under OOD conditions. 

Stack Square BoxInBin Average 

grasp full grasp full grasp full full 

Source-only 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.00 

Target-only 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.0 0.7 0.7 0.47 

Co-training 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.1 0.9 0.8 0.53 

Ours 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.4 0.9 0.9 0.73 

Table 7: Real World Image-Based Policy In-Distribution Success Rates. The Average denotes the average full task success rates over all tasks. 

Stack Square BoxInBin Lift MugHang Drawer Average 

grasp full grasp full grasp full reach full grasp full open grasp place full full 

S.-only 0.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.4 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.15 

T.-only 0.7 0.4 0.6 0.1 0.9 0.8 1.0 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.9 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.60 

Co-train. 0.7 0.7 1.0 0.5 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 1.0 0.8 1.0 0.7 0.7 0.4 0.67 

Ours 0.8 0.8 1.0 0.4 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.8 1.0 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.77 

Table 8: Real World Point-Cloud-Based Policy In-Distribution Success Rates. The Average 

denotes the average full task success rates over all tasks. 1 Demo 5 Demo Target Target-OOD Target Target-OOD 

Ours 0.56 0.28 0.70 0.32 

Co-training 0.46 0.00 0.38 0.22 

MMD 0.42 0.16 0.34 0.22 

Target-only 0.00 0.00 0.46 0.00 Table 9: Performance with Limited Target Domain Data. We report success rates for various methods on the BoxInBin task with the Viewpoint3-Point setting, under scenarios where data from the target domain is extremely limited. As shown in Tab. 9, our approach consistently outperforms the baselines, highlighting its robustness even with extremely limited supervision. 28 (a) sim-to-sim (b) sim-to-real Figure 10: Transport Plan Visualization. We visualize the transport plan for a randomly sampled batch during training the image-based policy, alongside corresponding observations from both domains. The left figure shows a sim-to-sim experiment, while the right shows a sim-to-real experiment. The visualization reveals that the transport plan effectively aligns similar states across domains, as indicated by high transport probabilities. 

# H Transport Plan Visualization 

To understand how optimal transport facilitates domain-invariant feature learning and enhances cross-domain generalization, we visualize the transport plan for a randomly sampled batch during training the image-based policy, along with corresponding observations from both domains (see Fig. 10). The left plot shows results from the sim-to-sim transfer experiment, while the right plot depicts the sim-to-real setting. The results show that the transport plan effectively aligns similar states across domains, encouraging domain-invariant representations. 

# I Visualization of Latent Space (a)  t-SNE  Visualization for  BoxInBin  Task  (b) t-SNE  Visualization  for Square Task 

Figure 11: Latent Space Visualization. Latent space comparison between the Co-training 

baseline and our method. In our approach, source-domain points (blue) and target-domain points (red) form a well-mixed cluster, illustrating how OT alignment harmonizes cross-domain feature distributions and enhances transferability and generalization. Beyond the feature visualization for the Stack task with the Viewpoint1-Point target domain, we also present additional t-SNE [ 55 ] visualizations in Fig. 11 for the BoxInBin task with the 

Perturbation-Point target domain, and the Square task with the Viewpoint1-Point target domain. We compare the latent spaces produced by the Co-training baseline and our method. In our approach, source-domain points (blue) and target-domain points (red) form a well-mixed cluster, highlighting how OT alignment harmonizes cross-domain feature distributions and improves both transferability and generalization. 29